// kate: font Liberation Sans; font-size 16; syntax None; bom off; indent-mode none;
.bookmark stories
+ Tears From the Heart

Once upon a time, a girl met a boy. They fell in love right away, and each opened their heart to the other. "I promise you love," he told her, and she fell into his arms. The next morning he was gone, and she discovered he'd left a fake number. She cried and thought, "all men are bastards." The end.

++ The Happy Couple

Mark is in love. It's not like him. Yet he is full of romantic energy. It washes over him and washes him away, like sea waves. He's been seeing Florence for a few months, and they are perfect together. They clicked at once, love at first sight. Eyes meeting across the room, she strides towards him. She pokes him with a finger. "So you're that Mark guy they tell me about." "What do they say?" he asks, flustered. "Nothing good," she says, turns, and walks away. That night, she's in his hotel room and the next days he cannot stop thinking about her.

Apart from their age difference, and the fact he's married, it's perfect. Well, she's also married, with a young child. Details, nothing can stop destiny. He's a stubborn and confident man, works on intuition, afraid of no-one's opinion. That's how he made his money. That's why Florence loves him, for his power and strength.

He tells his wife, who stares at him in shock. "How old?" she asks. She cannot believe this conversation is real. "How long have you been seeing her?" All the obvious questions. "I don't want a divorce," he says, "just my freedom." He'd discussed this with Florence. He's a responsible man. Abandoning his wife and kids would be shameful. The correct choice is separation.

His wife doesn't argue, and doesn't get angry. She has no tools to deal with this. The younger woman stealing her husband, it is such a caricature, so fatal. She wants to disappear. Money, she panics, how will she live? It's all his money, she has nothing, except part of the house. If he cuts her off, she'll have to beg. A life spent at home, raising the kids and cleaning. She feels powerless, mute.

Florence and Mark travel, and make their plans. They will live together, she has already chosen a house. "I don't want your money," she tells him, and he insists. They fight over it, their first real argument, and finally she accepts. "Don't think you can buy me," she warns. "I know men like you." He assures her, he's different, and she relaxes again.

His friends tell him he's looking happy, for the first time in so many years. He feels he is bouncing with energy, euphoric, and confident. Florence's power flows through him. Only his sister scrutinizes him. She says, "you've lost weight, brother." He admits he isn't sleeping enough. Problems at work, he explains.

And yes, there are problems at work. The endless corporate politics have turned against him. Florence is his rock. She helps him understand what's going on. She warns him against trusting people who hate him and want to destroy him.

His accountant emails him, warning him he's been spending too much money. Well, of course, the houses and the travel, it's adding up. Everything in double now. He gets a personal loan from the bank. He buys Florence a new car. She's angry with him for wasting their money, and they fight. Later she forgives him. The car's OK, she says, and she takes it away for a drive.

It has been a year, and he's changed. His ex-wife sued for divorce and won a good settlement. The house went back on the market. It sold with a loss. He didn't care. Just money. They are fighting every day. She flips all the time. One minute, exuberant joy. The next, dark brooding anger. He can't control her and he can't predict her. He's drinking too much, and not taking care of himself.

One day his boss calls him in. "Mark," he says, "I'm letting you go. Your department is not working. You're in charge and I'm holding you responsible. We're shutting it down. Your people will go to Bill. Please take your personal belongings. You'll get a month of severance." Two men from security escort him out, to his office, and then out of the building.

He picks up the phone and calls his ex-wife. He needs someone to tell him it will be OK. Anyone. The calm voice says "the number you have dialed is no longer in service." He stares at the dirty wall of the small room. He reaches for the bottle of vodka. The bedroom door opens, and it's Florence, suitcases in hands. "I'm leaving you, it's over," she says, "don't call me and don't text me. You've done enough damage already."

++ The Careful Nurse

She likes old people, she says, because they talk so much. The old men and women in the home seem to like her too. "She's always in a good mood," they tell each other. "Such a good listener!"

She's worked hard for her nursing degree. Endless books, studying, writing, exams. The other students get better marks, and she guesses they all cheat. They've got people helping them, and they bribe the teachers. Well, that's easy. She can do that too. She can't use the computer, it's so difficult! Oh, could you check my work for me? Pretty please?

Finally, the torture is over and she gets that magical piece of paper. "Qualified nurse," she repeats to herself. "Qualified nurse!" That afternoon she's already sending emails around, looking for work. Soon she has a gig lined up. She'll join a team looking after a wealthy man who has cancer.

She dresses for work. Hair tied back, and the neat outfits she learned from the nursing home. Black and blue, white cap, long skirt, dark shoes. Expensive dark shoes. She has three colleagues, and they take shifts. Their patient is in his seventies and spends most of his time in bed. Before lunch they get him up, dress him, and take him for a walk in his gardens. He returns tired, and sleeps. Her colleagues prefer the evening and night shifts, as they have less to do. Despite the extra work, she prefers the morning shift, when he's awake and talkative.

He's an interesting man, who's built several large businesses. They get close, always talking. She asks him once, laughing, "so how much are you worth?" He laughs back, "that's one thing I regret. I never quite made a billion." She raises one eyebrow and tuts. "Silly man, I'm sure you have more regrets than that!"

He does. Hard work is good for you, he tells her. Yet it's no replacement for family. He married, his wife died in a car crash twenty years before. He has a son, forty-five now. The son hates his father and visits once a week, like it's a chore. They talk about nothing. He leaves as soon as he can, in his black Mercedes. She finds out he divorced his wife, and refused to help his father in his businesses.

It takes her almost six months to reconcile them. In the end, they hug, and she smiles to herself. The old man is getting stronger. He's promoted her to head of the nursing team. She replaces the other team members with her own people. Now she's the only woman. One evening, as the son is leaving, she goes with him. They have a meal in a restaurant close by, and she stays overnight at his house.

When they marry, soon after, they both know it's the right time. Why wait longer? Destiny makes its own plans. They buy a ranch, high in the hills, and plan their dream home. The father dies in his sleep a few months later. They name their baby after him. It is a boy.

++ The Principal Dancer

She's not the most beautiful. Poverty has eaten at her like moths eating a carpet. She looks tired. Yet when the music starts, it is a younger woman who dances. She was the principal dancer, the star of the National Ballet. She speaks the old language, the language before words. The language of face and arms and body. She's a dancer. And she takes the music and she shapes it into stories.

The dictator, Saka, spends years to assemble his National Ballet. His agents trawl the country. In every village and small town, they organize competitions. They pick the best young musicians and dancers. The Ballet school is a ticket away from the poverty and the dirt.

This is no ordinary ballet. It is Saka's passion, his obsession. He will conquer the world. Not with soldiers or guns. No, with his dancers, his drummers, the ancient force and power of his people.

He tells the griots: you will teach my students. The griots refuse. These are holy secrets, they say. These rhythms came from our ancestors. To teach them will anger the spirits. Saka listens. He tells the griots, make two groups. Oldest here, younger there. They do this. He points to the old men, and chops with his hand. His guards take away the old griots. Now, says Saka. You will teach my students.

Almost every day, he comes to watch the trainings. He watches the girls as they fly like birds over the stage. He listens to the drummers as they slap and hammer and tap. Too slow. Too clumsy. He points. This one, that one. No. Those two, keep. There are no second chances. Saka decides, and it happens.

Five hundred boys and girls go into the schools. They are the best of their generation. Fifty climb onto the plane for the first world tour. Their handlers, technicians, and coaches carry them like precious jewels. The others... some are useful. The rest go back to their villages.

Saka's National Ballet visits Paris, London, Brussels, Stockholm, Berlin, Moscow. It travels to Hong Kong, Seoul, Tokyo, Manila. It stops at Sydney, and Auckland. It hits San Francisco, Las Vegas, Chicago, New York. Saka says, our people demand that we show the world who we are.

It is an extraordinary show, his National Ballet. The world has never seen this, and never will again. Saka does not see it perform abroad. He never leaves his country. His people need him.

The foreigners who see it cannot understand the stories. They do not know the rituals of harvest, of love, of birth and death. They see Africa, loud and strong, and they go back to their clean, safe lives.

For two years, the National Ballet travels, gives shows, sleeps, and eats. Finally, exhausted, it comes home. Most of the original performers are gone. They have vanished, a few at a time, into the cities of the West. Others came to refill the ranks. The National Ballet sows its artists like seeds into the world.

The principal dancer is one of these. She escapes her handlers after a show in Paris. She and some of the drummers feign food poisoning. They leave the hospital before dawn. They have friends and relatives living in the city, who they join.

She is now an illegal, a //sans papiers//. She lives in a tiny dirty apartment with many others. Always paying cash, always short of money. She gives dance lessons. It is like teaching big babies. They know nothing. They have never even seen a harvest. And the music! Where are her drummers? They are all busy making babies with white women.

Sometimes she does a show. Sometimes her drummers are there, and they play the music of the Ballet. These are magical moments. Her students start to understand.

Little by little she collects a following. These whites, hungry for meaning. She lets them take care of her. They pay her bills, organize her classes, drive her around. She is a small woman and looks fragile. People want to look after her. And they give more when there is drama and suffering. So, she shows them this.

Her supporters come filled with passion. They leave empty and drained. She dreams of her past as the principal dancer of Saka's National Ballet.

++ The Serial Innovator

He works in a startup. It's not his first. But this time it'll be different. He's got better options and the team is great. The CTO knows the business and has amazing ideas. The offices are in an old warehouse, near the wharfs. They have an espresso bar. There are arcade games! Fresh fruit every morning, beers every Friday evening. The video conferencing is top-of-the-line. Their Internet comes straight from a fiber backbone. He's Employee Number Sixteen. His only regret is that he didn't get in earlier. It's hard to live on the salary yet he believes in the company.

The hours are long, and he's started keeping a toothbrush in the washroom. His colleagues also sleep over, now and then. It's kind of like camping, and cool for those with long commutes. It builds a real sense of community. In theory it goes against health and safety rules. The boss, Mr CEO, is happy to let them do it. After all, they're all under pressure.

The product is fantastic. It's revolutionary. They have three months to get the shippable prototype ready. That sounds like a lot, 90 days of sixteen hours, yet it passes by like a speeding train. Days melt into weeks, and months. Their deadline approaches. The CEO stops smiling so much, and starts shouting more. Panic turns to exhaustion. They have endless meetings. The testers take the products, and come back with confusion. They can't understand how to use it. They ask what it's for. "Find different testers!" orders the CEO.

Just before the deadline expires, the CEO says, "Great news everybody!" They have new financing and a new deadline. They're saved! Relief washes over the team. Everyone was freaking out. The team gets back to their routine. Meetings, progress charts, coding, meetings. On Friday there's extra beer. That weekend the offices are empty, for once.

Nine months later, they're still coding. One day the CEO announces: "The funding has run out, we're shutting it down. Thanks everybody. You can all go home." He does the math, and it doesn't compute. Fifty million, in a year. How is that possible? Rent, salaries, it comes to ten million, max. There's nothing to show for the money except a few patents. Those get sold to another firm. The CTO takes it hard. It was his idea, his vision, and it failed.

Years later, he's still thinking of this project. He's drinking coffee with some of the old crew. "It could never have worked," they decide. The CTO was just wrong. All that effort for nothing. He's working for a large firm, and getting offers from startups.

Time to try again, maybe?

++ The Festival Organizer

"You can help me make it work," pleads the promoter. They're sitting in a large meeting room on the 20th floor. The promoter boasts he's friends with the owner of the company. He gets the space for free. "I am a VIP!" he says. He waves his hands and smiles, all teeth.

"How many posters did you print?" asks the organizer. She's there because the promoter told her it would be fun. He wants her to help. Kind of late, isn't it, she thinks to herself. The music festival happens in two months' time.

A woman replies, "we did five hundred." "Five hundred?" she asks, shocked. "You said a thousand people. Are you insane?" The woman raises her hands and voice in defense. "We didn't have budget, so I paid for these myself!" she says.

The promoter waves this away. "You can post them in the usual places," he says.

"Look," says the organizer. "Events are my business. This is what I do. Five hundred posters is not going to work. How many press releases have you prepared? How many journalists are you working with?"

She sees this group of people are not ready. "Who's done an event before?" she asks. Nobody moves. "So," she continues, "About the artists. Let's talk about the groups. How many are coming?"

"We've got over fifty coming," says the promoter. "How many contracts did you sign yet?" she asks, getting irritated. "That's still happening," he replies. "How many?" she insists. "Ten, twenty...?"

"None yet," he admits. And then he shakes his head. "Look, if you're going to cause problems, maybe you should leave." "Yes, good idea," she says, and picks up her bag and walks out.

A week later, he's calling her again. "You're the only one who can make it work!" he pleads. She tries again to explain the problems to him. "We've gotten our sponsors," he replies, "it's going to happen!" //Sponsors.// A magic word. She needs a gig, it's been a while and she's running on empty.

"I'll help if you let me run this the right way," she tells him. "Super, for sure!" he replies, "can you come and pick me up? I'm at the station and need a lift to the center of town." She frowns. "But I have plans. This isn't convenient for me." He cuts her off. "Well, if you want to be like that, I'll find my own way." She sighs, and gives in.

The festival happens, yet the nightmare seems endless. She has no authority or budget to sign contracts. The main acts cancel in anger. The promoter brings in substitutes. God knows what he's promised them. The venue is demanding payment. Full payment upfront. All she can do is send them to the promoter. He seems to be away a lot. Just as the venue is going to cancel, there's enough money to pay them.

The technicians and the other staff are all working for free. It's a benefit event. Starving children. She needs money for the sound and video rent. The promoter shouts her down when she demands it. "It's your fault," he yells at her. "Maybe you stole the money yourself! Pay them, I'll reimburse you tomorrow when we've closed." She borrows from her parents, and pays for the equipment herself.

On the day the weather is fantastic. There is cold beer and barbecues and people turn up and pay. The audience seem to enjoy themselves. The promoter has his brother and cousins at the tills. They glare at her when she asks to be repaid, and they leave with the cash boxes. The next day she goes to the promoter's house. She must collect her fees and the monies she's advanced. "No, sorry," they tell her. "He's gone, no idea when he'll be back."

++ The Doctor's Daughter

"You're looking chubby," he tells her, over dinner. She touches her face. She leaves her dessert. No appetite. They've been arguing a lot recently. She can't get it. The first year they were together, he was fine. It is as if he became a different person.

Their fifth anniversary is coming up. He promises to take her out. She buys a new dress, she wants to be beautiful for him. On the day itself, he has to meet people. He will be home late. She spends the evening alone at home, hurt and angry. He comes home after midnight. He slides into bed beside her. She smells the alcohol, and pretends to be asleep.

He's studying again. Business school, this time. Before that, marketing. Before that, Eastern philosophy. He studies evenings and weekends. She works office hours. They live together like uncomfortable strangers in an elevator. She wishes he'd get a proper job. When she says this, they fight. "They're racist!" he tells her. "You don't know how hard it is for a black man. You whites," he says, and she winces. "Go study," she says, "I want you to be happy."

Her mother never liked him. "He's not a nice man," she says, shaking her head, after meeting him. "He doesn't make you happy." She cuts her mother off, refuses to talk to her again. He is handsome. He is full of love. He makes her passionate and come alive. When she is with him, she feels energized, euphoric. It is magical. How can her mother be so petty and jealous?

"You have to forgive her," he tells her. "Her generation aren't used to foreigners. Jealousy and hate, I know it so well. She'll get over it in time." His eyes are moist and she sees five hundred years of pain. She hugs him and wonders how her mother can be so small-minded. She tries to kiss him, and he turns away. "I'm tired," he says, "Tomorrow."

They are always in debt. She doesn't understand it. Before she met him, she'd never owed anyone money. She saved every month. Now, it seems she is scrabbling at every turn. They spend so much, on wasteful luxuries. Trips they can't afford. Eating out, several times each week. A new car. New furniture. The worst part: he neglects everything.

He takes the car and brings it back with scratches. Then, dents and broken lights. What happened? she asks, furious and shocked. "Some idiot backed into me," he says. It is always someone else's fault. "Did you fill in the insurance form?" she asks. "He drove off! I called the police of course."

She gets the post. Credit card statement. She opens it, glances at the total. What?! She reads again. No mistake. It's more than her monthly salary. Her hands tremble, as she looks through the details. Some mistake! This isn't her. She tries to make sense of the text. Her mind is slipping on ice. She grapples for balance.

The bank! The number is there on her statement. She calls them. Give me a real person... give me a person... ah.. "There's been a mistake on my credit card" she blurts. They calm her down. Client number. Name. OK. They check. Madam, was your credit card stolen? "No," she says, "no, it wasn't. I have it right here." Sorry madam, these are legitimate purchases. All confirmed with PIN code." She frowns. Who else knows her PIN code apart from her husband...?

When he comes back from his studies, she confronts him. He denies it flat out. "It's one of those websites you shop on. I told you not to trust the Internet," he says. "Cancel the card, and if the bank won't refund you, change banks. Damn thieves." It does not end well. She argues with her bank manager, and closes her accounts there. After years of the same bank! She sits shivering in anger, fear, insecurity. Her world is collapsing.

One day, she is too sick with flu to go to work. In the post she gets a letter with a court summons in her name. Unpaid traffic fines, more than a year of them. Her mind finds itself on slippery ice again. This is impossible! She parks with such attention! There's a number for the bailiff. She calls to ask for details. The female voice is happy to explain. Eleven different parking violations. Unpaid despite many reminders for each one. Fines and costs are now over a thousand dollars. She sits in shock, unable to process.

I'm going mad, she thinks. I can't take this. She weeps slow hot tears as she takes the bottle of sleeping pills, and puts a handful in her mouth. The black void pulls at her. Come, it says, why fight?

And then her phone rings. It's him. "Where are you?" he asks, without pause. "At home," she tries to say. It comes out as a nasal mumble. "Don't expect me home this evening," he continues, as if she'd not spoken. "I've got stuff to do, put the garbage out, OK?" He cuts the conversation. She holds the phone, stares out of window at the wordless city.

In her mind, an ancient door slides open. Something steps out. "No," it says, "not that way. We fight." The bottle of pills drops from her hand. She spits the pills out onto the carpet.

She goes to the cupboard where her husband keeps his papers and books. It's locked as always. She has a second key that he never knew about. She opens it. Inside there are piles of papers. She takes the piles one by one and goes through them. Finally she sees it: a plastic bag with letters. They are all addressed to her. Dozens and dozens of them.

The tickets. Then reminders. And second reminders, then final warnings, and penalties, and letters from lawyers...

She confronts him when he gets home. Waves the papers in his face, shouting, what is this? What IS this?

He looks at the letters, and then at her, and then explodes in rage. "You looked through my papers? How DARE you?" He slaps her, once, and then again, harder. She falls to the floor, in shock. He kicks her in the ribs, in the face, in the back. He shouts. "Never." Kick. "Touch." Kick. "My stuff!" Kick!

In the hospital, they recognize her name, and call her mother. The doctor checks her daughter. Nothing broken. She asks, "Did he do this?" and her daughter nods. She calls the police, who send a unit. They write up a statement, and then go to arrest him. He does not deny hitting her. It was her fault, he explains. She told me I'm too poor for her, and she kept taunting me with racist slurs. In the end I couldn't help it, I got angry. It's terrible, and I feel so bad about it. He is crying, miserable, a broken man.

He is not charged, instead they both get warnings, he for assault, and she for hate crimes. Much later, at home, he tells her he's sorry, and that he loves her. She looks at him, and sees the man she fell in love with. For a brief moment she feels the connection again. She wants this so much, and she's so afraid of what comes next. And then she remembers his violence, his lies, his stealing. The other voice speaks. "//Leave,//" it says, and she takes a step towards him. "Make me!" he says, but takes a step back.

++ The Party Maker

He wanders into his favorite place, a large bar and restaurant. The spot is popular with noisy young people looking for good times. It's early on this Saturday summer evening. He chats with the bouncer, Mike. The large man enjoys the distraction, and tells him little fragments of his life. His ex-girlfriend and the unexpected baby. His boss. He high-fives the bouncer and cuts the conversation. "Catch you later, Mike, I'm gonna get myself a beer". He crosses over to the bar.

Outside on the terrace he finds a large round table and sits with his cold bottle. People are trickling in. He watches them. A good mix, typical of this part of Texas. Migrants come here from all over the US, and beyond. Men check out women. The women pretend to ignore the men. Some couples. Some loners, backs to the wall, body language shouting, "I wish I was taller."

The place is getting full now. A small group of young men sit on the steps beside his table. White, black, Hispanic. They look uncomfortable. He turns to them, asks "where y'all from?" Soldiers from a nearby army base, on a night out. He sweeps his arm to show his table. "Come join me," he says, "it's more fun at a table," he smiles. The men accept, and get up and join him. They're glad for the chairs, and the welcome.

These young men are smart, and curious. Not yet deployed, they're optimistic and trusting. He tells them sweeping stories of his own foreign adventures. They laugh with excitement. He stops, puts his hand on the table, and states the obvious. "We need women!" One soldier points with his chin. "How about those two?" He turns to see two pretty dark-haired women. They look bored and uncertain. "OK, don't move!" he tells the men, and gets up.

"Hi ladies, how you doing?" he asks them, not listening to the answer, which is always "fine" or "great." He watches for any signs of irritation. They seem happy to talk to him. "You waiting for someone else?" he asks, and they say no, it's just the two of them. He frowns, studying their features.

"Where are you from?" he asks. "Guess," says one, laughing. He tries to place them. Dark eyebrows, dark green eyes, pale skin, high cheekbones. Lebanon? Georgia (the country, not the state)? They laugh and shake their heads, "no."

"Won't you join us? We've space," he invites the women with a broad sweep of his arm. They look at the handsome, crew-cut male faces, shrug, and accept. "Sure, why not."

The two women sit beside him, and he chats with them, making more wrong guesses. Russia? Armenia? They laugh. The soldiers buy them drinks. Everyone is happy, it's a great party. Finally, he admits defeat, and they tell him, "India." He's shocked, impressed, and fascinated.

"The most beautiful woman I ever met," he says, "was from Georgia. We talked for five minutes, and I wanted to marry her right on the spot. You both the same features. I was //sure// you were Georgian! But India, wow... India!"

"Yes, India!" they laugh, flattered and enjoying themselves. They chat through the evening. The bar closes, and the public empties into the car park . His group is last to leave. The soldiers say goodbye and go their way, and the two women stay with him. "Do you want to go somewhere else?" he asks. "My car's there." He pushes his remote and the lights on his new Mustang convertible flash on and off.

Later, one of the women asks him, "so how long have you known those guys?" He answers, "Oh, I only met them this evening." "What?!" she exclaims, shocked. "We thought you'd known them for years! You were like best friends!"

++ The Pretty Woman

My mommy and daddy divorced when I was eight. Mommy got to keep me and Daddy told he could not stand to see her ever again. So he went away. I don't see him much.

Granny is a lot like Mommy. They act nice to everyone and people just LOVE them. She is always so polite when people are watching. She has a honey voice. "I //love// you," she says to me like she means it.

Everything is Daddy's fault, she says all the time. Poor Mommy, everyone is against her. She tells me I have to stay with her, all my life. One minute, she's praising me, telling me I'm her smart baby. Next minute she's yelling at me. She tells me I'm an impossible child, I won't listen, how I don't know what I'm doing is wrong. Then she starts crying, and I feel bad.

She is never wrong. Everything bad is someone else's fault.

She always has bills that she doesn't pay. She tells me: cheating, lying, and stealing are OK as long as you get something out of it. She steals from me, says she'll give me the money back. She never does. She cries or gets mad when I ask her for it.

She stopped talking to her old friends because they don't have money to give her. Money, money, money. It is all she thinks about. She used to hit me, and threaten me with horrible diseases. "If you use the phone you'll get cancer in your brain." Or, "if you don't eat this food you'll get stomach disease and have to go to hospital." Everything I like doing is shit, for her. When I dress myself she tells me I am stupid, and she changes my clothes.

She never says "please" or "thank you" at home. She says, "do this or else!" Always "or else!" I have to go to the shops for her, do the dishes, and the laundry. Daddy once taught me to cook and she threw a rage fit. She said he was making her poor baby into his slave.

She treats me like a baby, asking "did you go poo-poo? How was it? Soft or hard?" She does this in front of my friends, in public. She tells me I don't wash, that I smell, that I'm fat. When we're with family she's always complaining about me. She keeps saying how she sacrificed her life for her poor baby.

At school I'm bullied a lot, and don't know how to stop it. The teachers know and do nothing. Mommy says it's my fault for not making friends. I once got sick with appendicitis. She complained the whole time I was in hospital. Daddy should have been there to look after me, she said. Then she said how lucky I was that she was there, that if Daddy had looked after me, I would be dead.

I'm sixteen now and want to leave and live with Daddy. Mommy doesn't want that. I made a friend at school. Mommy spoke to her and told her I am depressed and hysterical. My friend stopped talking to me. I don't know who I could ask for help.

The worst part is how people tell me, all the time, how amazing she is and how lucky I am. Sometimes I think I'm the crazy one, and Mommy is just trying to save me. Sometimes I want to kill myself, so I don't hurt other people like she hurt me.

I miss Daddy.

++ The Plundered Pilot

Keith is talking to a man in the corner of the room. I've known Keith for ages, so I go to say hi. He's agitated, stressed. It's not like him. He's always been a calm man, confident and quiet. He owns a plane, a little Cessna. He does small commercial gigs, takes tourists over the Grand Canyon. When he gets something extra, he puts it aside. "One day I'm going to buy our ranch," he tells me. Keith and Alexis, and their retirement dream.

"Hey Keith, how's it going?" I ask. The other man sits there, says nothing. Dark curls, Shaded glasses. Good suit, heavy gold watch. Keith shakes his head and shoulders in anger. "Fine! It's going fine!" he tells me. "Now can you please leave us alone? //Please//?"

I'm shocked. I've never seen him like this. "Sure, catch you later," I tell him, and go back to my place at the bar. I watch them. They're arguing about something. The man shrugs, talks. He's quiet and intense. Keith calms down, stop shaking his head. He's nodding now. The small drama ends with them shaking hands. Keith signs a piece of paper. The man folds it, puts it in his jacket pocket, stands, leaves. I wait a minute, then take my drink and sit across from Keith.

"Mind if I sit?" I ask him, already sitting. It's our running joke. He looks at me, not laughing, and sighs. "What was that?" I ask, still somewhat annoyed at him for sending me away before. "Nothing," he says, "Business." He changes the subject, asks about my kids. We chat for a while. He's distant, skinnier, hasn't shaved. I want to ask more about the guy in the suit. Then I don't. No need to stir the pot, right?

That's the last time I see Keith. Two weeks later I get a funeral card from Alexis. His //widow//. I call her immediately. Keith is dead. He crashed his plane. No passengers, just him. I'm lost for words. "So sorry." It's all I can say. Keith?

The investigator finds the plane had no technical problems. It didn't hit anything. The skies were clear. So he rules it a suicide. Keith crashed on purpose. No insurance for Alexis. The worst part is Keith cleared out their joint savings account. And just a few days before I saw him. Over $180,000 gone, no explanation.

++ The Best Friend

Sure, I'll tell you what happened.

We had a rocky relationship from the start. I'm a large guy and usually pretty chill. Yet we fought all the time. And I mean, //all the time!// There was no real reason. Sure, I look at other women sometimes. I'm human. She'd freak out. "Hey you," she'd shout at a waitress who I'd said hi to. "Do you want to go out with my boyfriend? Do you?"

We stopped going out after she got into a fight. Some woman had called her a whore, when her boyfriend stared at my wife's legs. Short shorts, right? I told her she'd been showing a lot of skin, men were going to stare. "So you think I'm a whore, do you?" she said. "No," I sighed. "He called me a whore in public, in front of everyone!" she said, to anyone who would listen. For years.

I thought she was insecure and jealous. She's so good looking though. I was so in love. So in love. My family loved her too, told me I'd found the right woman, told me to look after her. So that's what I tried to do.

She started going to college, evening classes. I paid her tuition. "It's //our// money," she said. To be honest I don't know why I wanted to marry her. But I did, more than anything, and she said "yes" right away.

About a year after we married, my unit deployed to Iraq. We spent our last night together, and she cried, and told she would wait for me. Only two months later, our Humvee hit an IED. It was like I flew overseas to get blown up. I was in hospital for a month and then they sent me home on disability.

The decision happened so fast I didn't have a chance to call her. OK, I thought, I'll surprise her. I'm back from work, honey!

I got back to our place and the house was empty and quiet. The plants were dry and going brown. There was mail, a lot of mail. I walked through our home, and sat on our bed. The side cupboard was a little open. I pulled it open and saw this little beaten-up black notebook. I'd never seen it before. Strange.

I opened the book and read it. It crammed with letters and dates. "A.H.B, 3-12-05." The same letters showed up over and over. They were peoples' initials. Beside some of the names there were figures. Money, could be. There was an entry every few days, and the first ones dated back to years before we met. There, I found our first few dates. I looked through twenty pages, to the end. The dates continued until a few days ago. I recognized the last initials. J.A.K. One of my best friends, across the street. Wife and two kids. Not possible. No harm taking a look, right?

So I got up and walked outside and crossed the street and rang the doorbell. He opened it, then went pale when he saw me. "Have you seen her?" I asked him. He pointed over his shoulder, into the house. I walked inside, and there she was, in a towel, on the sofa.

She didn't even blink. She stood up, and shouted at me, "What do you think you're doing here?" She was screaming at me, "You bastard, almost getting killed! I thought you were dead! It was terrible! How //could// you?"

What, I said, what the f? Why are you naked here with Jon?

Jon kept saying, "sorry man, I'm so sorry, I didn't realize what I was doing, sorry man." It was obvious he meant they'd been sleeping together. Where's Judy and the kids, I asked him. "She left, about a month ago, when she found out," he said, starting to tremble.

A month ago.

All the time she's shouting at me, threatening me. She's accusing me of sleeping with whores in Iraq. She's saying I betrayed her from the start.

"Hey," I say to her, "look what I found!" I hold out the book. She lunges for it, shouting, "Mine! That's mine, give it to me! I swear I'll rip your eyes out! You piece of shit!" She's saying the most horrid things.

I tell her, "I've read it and taken pictures of every page. I'm going to find every one of those guys you slept with." That's not the word I used. I tell her, "I'm going to find these guys and tell each of them what kind of trash you are."

She stared at me, completely blank, for about a quarter of a second. I'd never seen her make that expression before. Like her face froze while her brain was doing some kind of calculation. And then she shrugged. "Fuck you, you piece of shit" she said, went to dress, then left the house.

I had a few beers with Jon, months later when I'd pulled myself together. Poor guy never knew what hit him and I wasn't mad at him. He'd just saved my life. I was so lost. Two years we were together. I loved her so much. When I got back to our place, her clothes and papers were gone, and so was she. I never saw her again, though I spent a while looking for her.

++ The Greek Goddess

Five of us are in a bar, discussing the day's events. We notice the curious sight of a young woman talking to a well-dressed man. I'd say he was her boyfriend. She is close to him. She gazes into his eyes, touches his arm, and laughs with her entire body. She shakes her shoulders and body as if in rapture. Her hair is long and beautiful and she whips it up, gazing straight into his eyes.

It is a dramatic scene. Yet what makes it curious are the other two men standing there. They are not talking, only watching the young woman. I guess they're friends or colleagues. She is in total control of the group. She turns to one friend, flashes her smile and strokes her hair. Then turns back to her boyfriend, and continuing her gyrating seduction.

Two of our group leave to use the toilets. When they don't come back, we go look for them. We find them stopped across the bar. The young woman is now talking to one of our friends, a guy from California. He's the vain one of our group, happy to get such attention. His friend looks on, silent and bemused.

She is doing the same dance. We join the audience. She touches his arm, she shakes her shoulders. Then she's back with her first date, and our friends are back. I tell California, "maybe you don't want to go back there." "Leave me alone," he says. "I have something to take care of." He goes back, and the young woman swings her attention to him again. The boyfriend, if he is that, stands silent, frozen, in a trance, waiting.

I excuse myself. "I've got to find out more," I tell my friends, and walk over to the young woman. "Excuse me miss, where are you from?" I ask her. "I'm Greek," she replies. "Ah," I reply, "//efkaristo//, thank you." She looks at me without any expression. She waits. No irritation, nor amusement. Just... nothing. I look at her face. She is pretty, yet not striking. Her beauty is an act, confidence and body language. I shrug and return to my friends. She's back with California, laughing, flipped her hair around, touching his arm.

The next day my friends and I see California. "Hey man, how did it go last night?" I ask, grinning because I can see he is in a sour mood. "Don't ask," he says. "Did you go home with her?" we of course immediately ask. "No, she left with the other guy, what a waste of time!" he replies. We laugh.

++ The Lost Boy

The man sits next to him, unwraps a package, and offers him a piece of bread with sausage. "Here, take some, you're hungry," says the man. He takes a piece then nibbles at it. It's the first food he's had in days, since he left. He can hardly swallow, his mouth is so dry. The man offers him a canteen. "Drink" he says. It's water. He drinks and hands back the metal bottle, then finishes the rest of the bread.

"Where you from?" says the man. "Gukovo," he mumbles. "Runaway, eh? What are you, thirteen, fourteen?" says the man, and gives him another chunk of bread and sausage. He nods, says nothing, and eats. The man reaches into his pocket and takes out his wallet. He opens it, pulls out some notes. "Take this, you'll need it," says the man. He hesitates. Why is this stranger helping him?

"My uncle was from Zverevo." says the man, nodding, as if he can read his mind. "Horrid little town, nothing but the mines. Just like Gukovo. You're going to a better place. Here, take this." The man hands him the money again. So he takes it, folds it, puts it into his shoe. "Come," says the man, "I will show you something important." The man gets up, stands in front of him. He's dressed like a factory worker, heavy trousers, heavy shoes, shirt, jacket. He is carrying a black bag. His face shows nothing except an easy smile. It's a face you can trust.

The young boy shrugs and gets up. He follows the man out of the waiting room, deserted for hours. They walk out of the station yard and cross the single track into the autumn woods. He wonders where the man is taking him. They get deeper into the woods, well out of sight of the station. The man opens the bag he is carrying and takes out a length of rope.

"I will tie your hands behind your back now," he tells the boy.

The boy complies. It seems inevitable.

++ Conclusions

These stories aren't meant to make full sense, yet. I hope they become clearer as you read the rest of the book. The theme in these stories, in every psychopath's story, is deception and pain. The characters vary. The scenery changes. And yet we see the same drama played out over and over. It is a story of a hunt that ends in pain, and worse. You may think you're immune. Few of us are, unless we are also psychopaths.
