// kate: font Liberation Sans; font-size 16; syntax None; bom off;
.bookmark escape
+ Escape from Jonestown

So you are entangled with Mallory, you've guessed correctly what he is, and you've confirmed with . This knowledge is only the starting point for what comes next. Mallory is not a mosquito that you can swipe off with one hand. For one thing he is as large and strong as you, and is holding on with both hands. For another, he has infected you with a kind of mental malaria, a deep and entrenched trauma.

If you want to become happy again, it is not enough to leave. As I explained in the preface, avoidance leads to depression. You must decode that trauma, and undo the damage. Working with a therapist who knows Mallory can help. Yet you are there, in your brain, every day. You are by far the best person to do this, if you decide you want to. I will explain how in the next chapter, [#escape].


There are two usual outcomes for Alice. Either she goes through the wringer and emerges used and broken. Or, she recognizes what is happening, earlier on in the game, and escapes. Since Mallory carefully targets those least likely to fight back, the odds are against Alice.

Once Alice has bonded with Mallory, there is no easy defense. The longer she stays with him, the deeper the bond and the more difficult the escape.

Alice may escape. She may take the children and run. She may pack her bags and go to a safe house, or stay with relatives. She may slowly rebuild her life. Yet fleeing, she takes her trauma with her. It can take her years to recover. I know psychopath escapees who a decade later, still suffer from PTSD.

This is the problem. After a certain point, Mallory's focused, determined abuse has changed Alice. The damage does not cure itself.

Walking away stops things getting worse. Yet it does not make them better.

++ The "Just Leave!" Fallacy

When you talk to those who are entangled with psychopaths whether it was personal or professional, your will often feel anger and irritation at their refusal to leave. It is the classic advice to anyone who reports abusive behaviour from their spouse or workmates or boss. And the classic response is "I can't," followed by a list of excuses and rationalizations that leave the advisor shrugging and saying, "well, it's your grave."

However obvious it may seem, the advice to "leave" is based on ignorance of how the psychopath's grip actually works. It assumes the only two options are leave and heal, or stay and suffer, whereas there is a third option that I believe is more effective for many if not most cases. Finally it ignores the reality of many situations where the victim or victims simply //cannot// leave.

Often, the abusive relationship is entangled in a group, or family. Leaving the psychopath means leaving that group. This can be unacceptably costly. It's a calculation that cults depend on, starting with "ignore your relatives, //we// are your family now," and ending with, "if you don't accept our love, we'll kick you out and you will be all alone."

I've been in groups where it is clear (now) that there was a psychopath leading the charge towards madness. By the time I'd understood what was going on, my investment was so heavy that to leave required impossible mental gymnastics. Partly, it is the "sunk costs" fallacy, of course. There was not going to be any return on that investment. It was already lost. However, leaving would also have meant cutting off contact with the rest of the group.

One reason some mothers stay with abusive husbands is not that they're stupid, or that they enjoy the abuse. It is to protect their children. Yes, a court may award the mother full custody. And yet that's a gamble. A court may as well believe the psychopath's stories -- "she's a drug addict," "she beats the children," "she abuses them sexually, your honour" -- and hand the children over to their abusive parent. This happens, and the good parent's reaction of staying close and protecting her children is natural and logical.

Psychopaths are dangerous in their utter disregard for the cost to others of their actions. It is not so much that they are unpredictable. It is that they will do the unthinkable to maintain their self-image of power. Some psychopaths, when confronted and faced with disgrace can be extremely violent to their own children. The logic is one of, "if I can't have this toy, then no-one will!"

Let's re-examine the //modus operandi// of a predator. Entangling the victim isn't incidental damage. Rather, it is the core glue of the abusive bond. The relationship between the victim and the abuser is one of increasing investment to compensate for increasing abuse. The worse the abuse, the deeper and harder the bond. Even when the victim knows they are being badly abused, their mind often insists that the relationship can be saved, with a //little more effort.//

This process is, I believe, similar if not identical to how cults enslave their victims. To free someone from a cult you typically have to take them by force. True, people leave abusive cults, and that is usually when they have nothing left to give, and their mind gives up trying to normalize the relationship. That can take years, decades, even an entire lifetime.

The process is also similar to addiction, where one takes increasing doses of abuse to try to recreate a "super normality" that never actually existed. Similarly, kicking an addiction can be a long difficult process, requiring mental realignment as much, or more, than physical adjustment.

Like a drug, the psychopath's power depends on a narrative. Alice (the psychopath) says, "I will love you," or "I will make you rich," or "I will make you young again," or whatever Bob (the target) desperately wants. It's this narrative that Bob invests in, and Alice dangles, out of reach. The first hit is free, and from then on Bob pays in blood.

Saying "leave!" to a Bob is like saying "stop!" to an alcoholic or smoker or compulsive gambler. As if this was a new notion! The usual and paradoxical outcome is to alienate the Bob from advice giver, and drive them back into the arms of their Alice. At least that's one person who understands them.

However, our minds are rarely in total agreement and most addicts know they have a problem, even if they can't face it. There is a small sceptical voice. Give that voice leverage, and we've found the first step to freedom. Rather than dismiss the struggle the victim goes through every day, it's more helpful to acknowledge and support that struggle.

The simple idea that "this person you are with is a manipulator who traps you with false promises and lies, so they can steal everything from you" can be powerful, especially when the proof is laid out bare, again and again over time. Psychopaths carefully guide their subjects along a path where "do what I say" is the only option. They do this through a host of mind control techniques that I'll come to later. The counter-narrative suddenly opens a new path, one of resistance.

And now we come to the second reason why "leave" isn't sufficient. That struggle, and the development of resistance, is key to reasserting the victim's power, and move them from "victim" to "survivor" and then to "winner." A psychopath does damage on many fronts, yet the most profound and long-lasting damage is the annihilation of their targets' identity, self-image, and power. It is one thing to be robbed of one's wallet. It is another to told for years, "you are worthless," as psychopaths are wont to do to their children and partners and colleagues.

This is simple psychology and almost a caricature: only by confronting our worst fears can we overcome them. To the victim of an abusive relationship, their abuser has supernatural powers, bordering on the demonic. Running away, even if it were possible, changes nothing about that. It leaves the victim with all their fear, hate, and self-loathing. The damage can remain for a long time.

On the other hand, confronting, exposing, and beating the psychopath in one's life changes everything. When I've suggested this to people, the typical answer is, "//are you insane?//" We've been taught by popular fiction that psychopaths are violent, lethally dangerous, even casually murderous. What kind of advice is "stay and fight" to someone faced with a violent knife-wielding murderer?

It turns out that the psychopath's violence is -- like their love, their jealousy, and their anger -- a convincing yet essentially empty lie. For sure, there are violent people, and there are violent psychopaths. There may even be a correlation, though I believe other factors may be more significant.

However, once you accept the model of "psychopath as predator" rather than "psychopath as mentally ill," it becomes easy to predict the psychopath's behaviour, when faced with resistance. First, anger and threats, both extremely convincing and frightening to the unaware. If those do not work, then some action to prove their seriousness. If that has no effect, then backing off and changing focus.

The level of action is determined by culture and economics. What's the cost and benefit of teaching someone a lesson? On the one hand we have the fruits, whether they are compliance, money, sex, or time. On the other hand, we have escalating risks of exposure, confrontation with the authorities, and rupture of the bond.

A natural predator cannot afford even minor injuries. A cow with a broken leg can still eat grass. A lion with a broken leg will starve. This defines the level of violence a predator will exercise. It will choose the easier prey. It will not fight another predator except to survive (and reproduce, which is close). It will use bluff and noise to intimidate, yet will flee from a real fight.

And so it is with psychopaths. Of course they can deal violence and death, if it's a matter of survival. Yet often the risks aren't worth the potential benefits. If the victim is physically isolated, e.g. in a cult compound or cellar, or if they are young, or old, they are vulnerable, and "fight back" is terrible advice. However mostly the "victim" is an adult, capable of walking out the door, or calling the police, or fighting back in any number of ways.


+ The Vampire Slayer

In my last article I presented my tool kit for detecting psychopaths and dealing with them. I call this DOIT, for the main tools: diagnosis, observation, intervention, and treatment. I've already covered diagnosis and observation, which go together. In this article I'll cover intervention and treatment, which also go together.

++ Four Steps to Freedom

Before we start, please note that I am not a qualified psychologist. What I present comes from research and practice in the field, not formal teaching. Dealing with psychopaths, and helping others deal with them, has become an ongoing part-time occupation. If you find yourself the victim of abuse, be it at home or at work, please reach out for help. Counselling and victim support is widely available, if you can bring yourself to ask for it.

Let me take these four tools one by one again:

* //Diagnosis//: we aim to answer the question, "is this person or group the subject of an assault, slow or fast, by a psychopath?" We're diagnosing the victims, not the aggressor. The damage done by psychopaths follows regular patterns, which we can look for, and then when we've eliminated other possible causes, come to "there's a psychopath here somewhere" as diagnosis.

* //Observation//: next, we ask, "who is the psychopath?" It is typically a single individual, well hidden in layers of misdirection and apparent suffering. Only by slow and careful observation, and elimination of all other possibilities, can you conclude that a particular person is a psychopath. Hasty conclusions are dangerous, both because the accusation is so serious, and because it can be so easy to miss the real culprit.

* //Intervention//: having a working theory that "person X is a bad actor," we start to develop a strategy of disablement. Psychopaths depend on the active cooperation of their victims, also called "enabling." Remove that, and their con game slowly falls apart.

* //Treatment//: again, I speak of treating the victims, not the psychopath. There is no "cure" for being born and raised as a predator. However, for those being drained of their life blood, there is a route to recovery, based on changing the balance of knowledge and power, against the psychopath.

None of this is easy, or rapid. On relationship forums, there is a classic cry for help. "We've been together for about a year, and suddenly he (or she) has totally changed." The 12-month period from Jekyll to Hyde seems common. A well-adjusted psychopath works slowly and carefully. Adult humans are not easy prey: we are all the descendants of survivors, well-equipped to detect cheats and liars, and brutal in dealing with the obvious ones.

If it takes a year or more for a psychopath to ensnare someone in the long cons that they weave, then it will take a year or more to escape that and recover. Whether you are trying to shake yourself free, or someone else, you have to develop patience and resilience. These are useful skills in any case. They're vital when untangling the psychopath's web.

++ Outcomes

I've defined "freedom," in other writing, as "the ability to do interesting things with other people." As long as you are in a psychopathic relationship, you are captive. You will spend your available time and resources on that relationship, with no significant return.

However, more pragmatically, let me go through what you can expect, and more importantly, have to abandon, as possible outcomes:

* You will not get sincere apologies, ever. If you need this to move on, learn to stop needing it.
* You will not get the love, money, power, or whatever else it was promised.
* You will not get your money or time back. Accept the losses, and look ahead, not back.
* You will not change a psychopath, nor help them, nor "cure" them.
* You will not get a deal, or compromise, or negotiated settlement. Every deal is a lie.
* You may be able to salvage pieces of whatever projects you were investing in.
* You can stop the loss of money, time, and resources.
* You can learn deep and useful lessons about your own and others' psychology.
* You can change a psychopath's behaviour towards you or a group.
* You can force a psychopath to leave you or a group alone.
* You can break a psychopath, temporarily, if you are particularly determined.
* You can heal the stress trauma that comes from prolonged loss of resources and freedom.
* You can help other people move through the same process as you.

It can help to be explicit about your goals, both to yourself, and to others, and to keep measuring where you are, with respect to your goals, over time.

++ The Crystal Skull

I said other factors than "is a psychopath" may determine a psychopath's tendency to violence. One that seems to pop-up regularly is culture of origin. I find this particular story fascinating and illuminating. Psychopaths are, as I've explained, hyper-social and yet inherently cut-off from the social networks that surround them. That same person who is excellent at reading people, is unable to accurately understand the person they are reading. Even as they maintain dozens of intense conversations in parallel, shifting voice and face to suit each peer, they operate heavily on built-in assumptions and general guesses.

This shows as a fairly consistent level of paranoia and pre-emptive aggression that is decoupled from real events, and can be comically wrong. It is like a car driver, isolated in his or her cabin, predicting how aggressive other drivers will be. A driver who over-estimates will be constantly honking their horn, gesticulating at others, and getting into pointless accidents. A driver who under-estimates will be shouted at by other drivers for going too slowly, or acting "stupidly."

I believe that psychopaths learn their level of aggression and paranoia (that is, how aggressive others are likely to be) when they are growing up, and this crystallizes in their minds perhaps around 18. After that, it seems fixed, no matter how much trouble it causes for the psychopath.

In other words, a psychopath who grows up in a relatively violent, unstable culture -- say a poor inner city, or a corrupt developing country -- is calibrated for that culture. As long as they stay there, they will respond accurately to others, even they aren't actually reading each person's intentions. If they move to relatively peaceful environment, they will be constantly over-reacting, over-threatening, and over-acting. Likewise, the psychopath who grows up in a peaceful culture will be overwhelmed in a more violent culture.

This story is backed up by some studies of prison populations, that show a higher proportion of immigrants. However there can be so many reasons for that, including basic economic realities. Immigrant men tend to leave their professional networks behind, and poverty breeds crime.

++ What Does Alice Feel?

It's worth discussing what emotions a psychopath feels, since they can act the victim spectacularly well. It can be hard to feel no sympathy for someone who projects perfect sincerity and fragility. And a psychopath puts on their rage face and threatens you with violence and retribution, it is the face of a roaring tiger.

It is all fake. Internally, the psychopath has no anger, jealousy, fear, loneliness, hate, love, or self-pity. The fly on the wall will see Alice switch emotions fluently depending on whom she is talking to. She'll show exuberant affection, and then flip to cold, hard anger, and then go neutral if there's no-one to talk to. The significance is this: when you deal with a social brain, you can talk to its emotional states. You can talk to a sad person, a happy person, an angry person, these are real and sincere. However when dealing with a psychopathic brain, the emotions you see are meant to misdirect and manipulate you. If you talk to them, you lose.

A psychopath has two sincere emotions as far as I can tell. One is "go," the joy of success. The other is "stop," the sense of being blocked and having to find another route. There may be a twinge of frustration when "go" switches to "stop," yet it's almost imperceptible.

I once confronted a psychopath with physical evidence of his plans and lies, collected from an email server. He first declared that my accusations were outlandish. I showed him the evidence and told him we had two years of logs (it was only a few months, I was bluffing). His face gave a tiny twinge of confusion, the fraction of a second, followed by a tiny pause as he seemed to recalculate, and then he smiled and shrugged and said it didn't matter.

Knowing that the psychopath is an essential liar, you can ignore their emotional comedy and talk instead to their "stop" / "go" emotions. You can raise enough doubt and risk of pain that they back off. You can misdirect them with false leads and possibilities. You can make them put on mask after mask, until they are exhausted. Once you've decoded the psychopath, you can play all kinds of games with them, if you're that kind of person, and have nothing better to do.

++ Fighting Your Way Out

You'd think there are lots of possible strategies for freeing yourself or a friend or loved one from a psychopath's embrace. However it doesn't look like that. Obviously, if "run away" is an option, you take it. However it typically doesn't work like that. If you come to the point where you even have to ask "how do I get myself/him/her out of this situation?" then the bond is already made, the hooks are sunk, and the remaining question is usually, "how bad is this going to get before it gets better?"

If you have successfully diagnosed the situation and identified the psychopath, then you can warn others and start to disable the psychopath. If you are helping someone else, then they must go through the same thinking process of "this is an abusive situation" and "person X is doing this //on purpose//," and then they can also move to Intervention and Treatment.

Let me break these two tools into smaller pieces so we can look at concrete, tangible actions to take. Start with Intervention:

* Redefine the narrative -- replacing the broken promises with a more accurate model.
* Fix the economics -- staunching the loss of money, time, and other resources.
* Collect evidence -- arming yourself against the psychopath's reality distortion.
* Create consequences -- encouraging the psychopath to feel "stop."

And then we can break down Treatment into specifics:

* Regain control --  steering conversations and interactions, rather than reacting.
* Build alliances -- creating a united front among all those affected.
* Invest in self -- creating alternatives and inner strengths.
* Move to exit -- and working at that until you are free.

None of these are one-day exercises. As I said, it all takes time. During that time, you'll be under persistent, sustained attack from Alice, particularly if she realizes what you are doing. Few threats are as real to a psychopath as a person determined to unmask them. And when a psychopath sees danger, they react strongly and dramatically. You need to learn to keep your nerve and not buckle.

> "We start out feeling afraid of something, then that fear makes us feel weak, then that weakness makes us angry, and then we start to hate." -- Cracked.com, [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pWq8j0yXkMI#t=273 "4 Terrifying Psychology Lessons Behind Famous Movie Monsters"]

It is probably impossible to turn off the "fight or flee" response as long as your adrenal medulla is working. However you can learn to regulate and reduce your negative emotional responses to the point where you are effectively immune to direct personal attacks and threats. [http://hintjens.com/blog:81#toc12 I call this technique "grounding"]. It will save you from literal grief over and over.

 So the natural question is how to detect mimicking, and how to defend against it. Being a parent helps, as you learn to not take your children's emotional displays too seriously. Children can be extremely manipulative. Once you recognize that and learn to deal with it by ignoring it, or mocking it, you can do the same to a psychopath.

You must first ground your own emotions, and you can then see the other person's attempts to manipulate you. When you don't feel weak and lonely, then excess attention becomes visible as flattery. When you have no fear, then threats show themselves as empty statements.

In each of these phases you can see different behavioral traits. Extreme charm and attention during seduction. Extreme brutality and neglect during wrecking. Although Alice is quite systematic in her tactics, and predictable once you know she's a psychopath, she is a shape-shifter. At some level, there is no Alice, rather a sort of anti-Bob.


+++ Redefine the Narrative

All psychopathic relationships depend on a narrative, a web of promises and threats that keep Bob transfixed and compliant. Think of a knife, with a tiny tip of truth, and a blade and handle of lies. The small truth pricks the skin, and the lies slice the flesh open. Like any con game, it only works when you accept the package.

There is a small mantra you can repeat to yourself, when talking to a psychopath: //they are lying//. You should assume every statement that has any significance at all is false. You should want nothing, and believe nothing. In this mental state you can begin to see Alice's real goals more clearly. Usually they will be glaringly obvious.

Let's say you're working with someone who promises you fame and fortune, yet at every turn is creating alliances with people who attack you. Once you stop wanting the fame and fortune, you may see that the person intends to steal your work, and then blame you.

Or, imagine a man who inherits a large fortune, and an attractive woman who falls in love with him. She convinces him to leave his wife and children to live a life of True Love. Once the man stops wanting the exciting sex and relationship drama, he may see that she really wants to steal his fortune.

The best narratives are based on sex and money, and are incredibly hard to negate. We so //want// to believe. However like I said, most of us have a sceptical voice, so when the narrative does pop, it usually happens rapidly. And in its place remains the truth, that Alice was looking out only for herself, and was manipulating everyone else.

+++ Fix the Economics

Once you have fixed the narrative, you can start to fix the economics. Whether or not you see life in terms of cold economic decisions, the psychopath you are confronting most definitely does. Psychopaths will play with people for practice, yet any extended relationship is for profit, one way or another. Once you have an accurate narrative that explains what Alice is actually after, you can close the taps.

You can resist passively by refusing or failing to go along with whatever plans and schemes the psychopath creates. You delay, fumble, and in general become a useless hindrance. You can then progress to simple refusal. Remember: every question is a test, and the answer is "no." As you start to refuse, Alice will threaten you with dire consequences. You hold your ground, walk away, and make notes of the discussion.

I call this "disabling," after the common pattern of "enabler" in families with one psychopathic-slash-narcissistic parent. Enabling a psychopath means excusing them when they attack others, and placating them when they attack you. Enabling is appeasement, a swear word on many lips, and for good reasons. Disabling a psychopath has several good outcomes:

* You can starve Alice of the resources she needs, as she typically has no other sources of income.
* You can teach others, so that after every incident, instead of excusing Alice, you explain her behaviour.
* You can collect documentation on violations of norms and codes of conduct.
* You will start to force Alice to look elsewhere for people to con and steal from.

Concretely, if you have any kind of financial exposure to the psychopath, fix it. If you are business partners and you are not in full control, get out. If the psychopath is your partner, parent, or child, close any joint accounts, hide your credit cards, and take all necessary measures against identity theft, loans in your name, and so on. If the psychopath is working a social circle, leave no money on the table. In general terms, be extremely paranoid about your money, papers, and possessions. Don't be shy about using locks, redirecting your mail. If the psychopath is technically skilled, assume they will try to hack your email and other accounts.

+++ Collect Evidence

Psychopaths are geniuses at using rules the wrong way. "Here are these complex rules which apply to you, yet not to me because I'm special," is the classic story. It is strange how few people question such unfairness. Perhaps we've learned it from school and work. Good rules are simple, and apply to everyone equally. Luckily, no matter what a psychopath claims or argues, most of society works this way. This means that if you document a psychopath's rule violations over time, you can gain significant leverage over the situation.

This is vitally important when the psychopath realizes you are actively attacking them, and strikes back with loud, convincing stories of your wrong doings. You must expect this, and not take it personally when it happens. When you respond, do so carefully and minimally, with material evidence. While you may be tempted to make a dramatic exposure, it's wiser to play only the cards you must, to win each round.

First, you keep a diary or log. This gives you dates and key events for later reference. It is a good balance against the reality distortion and gas lighting that psychopaths use to befuddle people. It also teaches you to listen actively and try to take a more neutral point of view.

Second, use email. A good tactic is to email Alice with a summary of an agreement (which Alice has no intention of honouring), and ask if you understood correctly. Save that thread for later.

Third, use audio and video recordings if you are in face-to-face encounters. This is essential if there is any kind of verbal or physical violence. Making secret audio recordings is easy, though Alice will tend to realize you're recording the conversation. You can use your phone, or buy cheap USB pen drive audio recorders on Amazon.com. Do backup your recordings quickly and safely, and label them for future reference.

In some jurisdictions, recordings aren't valid as evidence in court unless there's mutual consent. You may even be prosecuted for invasion of privacy, if you make them. That may be a good trade-off. You can also simply ask Alice, "I'm going to record everything, is that OK with you?" and record her agreeing to that.

Psychopaths depend on secrecy and privacy to distort reality. Moving discussions into public view, keeping recordings, and even being open about this can change the dynamics of a situation quite considerably. Psychopaths will change their behaviour dramatically when they realized they were being watched, and the larger and more neutral the audience, the better in most cases.

+++ Create Consequences

I've said that psychopaths are pragmatic about costs and benefits, and you can raise the costs of occupation, so to speak. Collecting evidence is a large part of this. If you tell a psychopath, "I have (unspecified) evidence that will be used against you at some future point," you will get bluster and aggression in return. However, you will start to affect their behaviour and plans.

You must keep in mind that Alice has no fear of punishment or authority. "You will get in trouble" is not a significant threat, and can even be a challenge that's hard to resist.  Exposure and public humiliation is a much more powerful consequence, if you have the material to back it up. You must have given Alice the benefit of the doubt many times, not once. If you are exposing criminal acts, the outcome may be prison time. If you are exposing severe professional misconduct, you may be ending someone's career.

Since a psychopath is usually bluffing when they make threats, they'll assume you are too. If you want to change their behaviour you must therefore prove yourself willing and able to act on your evidence. Play your cards slowly, and keep them hidden until you must show them. Alice is paranoid, so if you are vague about what exactly you have, it amplifies your threat.

Conflicts with psychopaths do often end with the police and courts. This can be stressful for you if you are unused to it. For a psychopath, it's like going to the supermarket, they simply don't fear authority. The law can seem quite random, yet it is a system like any other. You do want to collect evidence and learn what kinds of facts are interesting. If you are in an extended conflict, you build a case slowly, by accumulating police complaints, letters, and so on. It is the same as evicting a tenant who does not pay, in a country like Belgium with tenant-friendly laws.

+++ Regain Control

By now we are moving to active resistance, and towards taking control of the situation. Psychopaths have specific weaknesses -- like their paranoia -- that you can learn, and then use. They are arrogant and their superiority complex makes them careless. They are unused to any form of attack or active resistance, and they will respond viscerally, dramatically, and often stupidly. And they will tend to repeat the same responses over and over, almost mechanically. Psychopaths are like actors: dramatically creative and yet unable to see beyond their stage.

So you have stopped reacting to Alice's provocations and promises, and started to decode how she works. The next step is to take the lead. You can do this in numerous ways. As a basis, you control the start and end of every conversation. You choose when to talk. You choose when to stop talking. If Alice tries to start a conversation, you "have things to do." If Alice forces her way into your space and begins making noise, you ignore her. If she insists, you leave.

Now, you can set the tone of any exchange. You can be friendly and generous, or cold and hostile. At all times, be deliberate and conscious of your words and emotions. In face-to-face discussions, using a hidden audio recorder helps. In written discussions, realize that every word you say is open to scrutiny.

Let's look at two specific strategies for controlling a conversation that you do not want to, or cannot, end. First, randomization, where you overload Alice with irrelevant detail about topics she does not expect to discuss. Second, provocation, where you deliberately antagonize Alice in order to record her saying something violently idiotically. Ironically, I learned both these strategies by watching psychopaths control other people.

Randomization means taking some arbitrary topic and discussing in intense detail. You must sincerely want to discuss the topic. A psychopath works with averages, knowing how people will respond in conversation, and typically thinking several moves ahead, like a chess grandmaster. When you leap around in unpredictable directions, they lose their grip, feel "stop," and tend to withdraw. You won't see psychopaths playfully retorting to a topic they do not control.

Provocation sounds dangerous, yet as I explained, psychopaths are creatures of bluff. The goal here is to kick off their visceral response, and to record it. You can often provoke a psychopath easily, by saying "no" to a request, without explanation. You can also accuse them of violation of whatever social contracts they are breaking, and threaten them with exposure. Do make sure you are recording, if you do this. You will often get only one chance, as the next time, Alice will have a story to answer that accusation.

In a confrontation, you must have full control over your emotions. If you respond with anger, or hate, or self-pity to the inevitable threats and accusations, you have lost it. Alice will shotgun accusations and slander against you and watch you intensely. When you react even microscopically, she sees it. So expect hurtful accusations against you, and yours.

+++ Build Alliances

Alone, you are vulnerable against a life-long manipulator. When you have the support of the group, confronting a psychopath is much easier. In fact if a group rallies against a bad actor in their midst, it is game over. This is why a psychopath spends so much effort dividing the group and keeping individuals fighting each other.

Psychopaths prefer secret conversations with individuals, where they can weave their spells of promises and lies. It is much harder to control a room of people, who are not already fully intimidated. Even a large group who are tied together in the psychopath's structure of lies can be deprogrammed, though it may take so long that it's not worthwhile.

These are the opportunities you have:

* A psychopath can only work on one individual at a time (though by switching rapidly it appears they are working on many in parallel). You can work on groups, as your main tools don't need one-on-one diplomacy. For instance if you have material evidence of a crime or lie, or other breach of contract, you can distribute that widely and cheaply.

* Most people will be receptive to such a message. As I said, we usually have a sceptical voice in our heads warning us that the situation is not "right." It is a matter of finding and talking to this voice.

* From the simple point of view of self-interest, anyone affected by the psychopath is already searching for a way out. If you can show them an answer, they will usually accept it.

This takes time, and evidence that cannot be faked or challenged. There are risks: the psychopath will often try exactly the same strategy, painting you as the common enemy. You have to be beyond reproach, and be utterly transparent with the people you need to work with. The other danger is that a psychopath may not always be a lone hunter. How psychopaths work together is a story for another time. Do not however assume that everyone is automatically on your side.

+++ Invest in Self

Those trapped in a psychopathic relationship often end up in bad shape. The slave, feed, and wreck phases of the relationship are corrosive to Bob's sense of identity. When you ask Bob "how's it going?" his answers revolve around Alice. "She's in a good mood today," or "crazy day today." Bob seems little more than a puppet, reacting to Alice's every whim. And if Alice isn't there, Bob is empty and passive.

We can reverse this process of destruction of self, making us more resistant to manipulation, able to fight back, and to imagine and construct better futures than "more of this pain." As the tools of mind control come in many shapes -- and I'll explain these in a further article on psychopaths -- there are many ways to invest in self:

* Rebuild relationships that broke as you engaged deeper and deeper with Alice.
* Build private space and time where Alice cannot create chaos, or try to take control.
* Start new projects that provide plausible alternatives for the toxic, failed projects you invested in with Alice.
* Find positives in your situation. Every day can be a valuable lesson, if you are able to learn.
* Turn your emotion and pain into creative art, music, dance, photography, or writing.
* Use this creative process to create positive energy, and happy moments. It's both good for you, and confusing and distasteful to Alice.

When I said psychopaths are lazy, that isn't true in all senses. They will work extraordinarily hard at their core skills of hiding, stalking, feeding, slaving, and so on. They will invest massively in organizing people simply to be able to control and exploit them. It is an irony of psychopathy that this energy can produce positive and creative outcomes. Many impressive feats have been accomplished by people driven to desperation to escape the psychopath in their lives.

+++ Move to Exit

The last move in solving this complex puzzle is to create exits, and move towards them. You are only as trapped as you believe you are (unless Alice has you physically restrained). When you can imagine a future past the psychopathic relationship, then you can create it. Whether it takes weeks, or years, the path to freedom is defined by your own imagination, and determination.

As soon as you can, you end the relationship with the psychopath. In the best cases it's about ten seconds after you realize, "this person is rather more selfish than normal." In the worst cases, it takes years to undo a professional or personal relationship that has woven deep into your life. No matter: once the relationship is over, you walk away and not talk to them again.

In forums on abusive relationships this is called "no contact," or NC. That means ignoring emails, phone calls, and chats. It can mean changing your phone number, and keeping off social networks. If you do share children, you work with an intermediary, e.g. child care centre, to avoid ever seeing your ex. If you are in the same company, you ask for a different location.

I believe that if you've regained control of the relationship, that Alice will generally ignore you once you're gone. However, some flavours of psychopaths don't let go easily, and NC is a valuable tool for cutting them off.

++ Breaking the Cycles of Abuse

I've explained two specific long-term abuse cycles:

# The majority case, where a vulnerable person is abused repeatedly over their life by different people. The abuse often seems mild, even low-level, and is invisible to most others.
# The psychopath's children, divided into winners and losers, with the winners getting an education in being professional bullies, and the losers serving as the training material.

The first cycle depends on specific responses from the victim. While these responses are often instinctive, we can learn, with time and help, to control them, and break the cycle. There are several parts to this:

* Reducing our emotional surface, so we want nothing and fear nothing, and so are less attractive to predators. There are techniques like "grounding" [http://hintjens.com/blog:81#toc12 that I've previously described] which can help.

* Learning to spot psychopaths in the wild, by learning how psychopaths operate and watching for such behaviour in people we meet, or already know. We can start to recognize predators as they approach us or our friends and family.

* Decoding the psychopath's attacks, and developing defenses against each of them. No defense can succeed every time, and the goal is to build resistance over time, rather than score a spectacular triumph.

This is analogous to how we secure a computer system from hackers. We close as many paths to attack as we can. We learn to spot suspicious behaviour in other computer systems ("why is this IP address trying to log in over and over with different passwords?"). And we learn specific attacks and defend against them ("Downloading security updates...").

It's the active resistance that breaks the cycle. Fleeing your demons, carrying your pain and defeat with you, simply marks you for further torture. It's entirely different to confront and overcome, even if it takes a long time.

In the second abuse cycle, from psychopaths to their children, clearly we can't expect minors to defend themselves. Nor can we expect the state to intervene in such families, except when the children are in immediate danger. The numbers involved are massive. If the rate of psychopathy is 4%, that means about 8% of families are affected. Any program that tried to separate psychopaths from their children would inevitably create opportunities for more, and worse abuse, by other psychopaths.

However for most psychopathic parents, there is an "enabler" parent who tolerates, excuses, and reinforces their abusive partner's behaviour. Enablers are trapped in the first abuse cycle. With targeted education campaigns, it should be possible to reach enablers, break the narrative they are stuck in, with their children, and provide them the tools for resisting and disarming their partner.

++ Grounding

Grounding is to remove all negative emotions from your mind, leaving happiness and clarity. It is one of the most valuable lessons I've learned in my life. Over time I learned how to ground myself consciously, and rapidly. Unlike meditation, which requires peace and calm, grounding works even when people are deliberately provoking you.

Grounding our emotions is essential for surviving and taking control of a psychopathic relationship, as it lets you resist direct emotional attacks. Grounded, we can talk and interact with anyone without playing emotional games.


Grounding has echoes in Cognitive Behavior Therapy, a technique developed by therapists who engage with the emotionally extreme minds described as "borderline". I suspect CBT is more useful to therapists, than to their patients. Grounding is simpler, and is meant for self-application in the living room and workplace.

The goal is to remain calm and happy no matter how difficult the situation becomes, and in that state, to accurately observe yourself and others. Only with accurate observations can you improve and negate your theories. Emotional turmoil can easily become a cage. So Grounding is a path to freedom and opportunity. It lets you experience the worst situations as "useful data" rather than "destructive pain".

Let me first describe the Grounding process, and then provide more detail. We start by identifying our strongest negative emotion, and naming it. We then reverse engineer it, using the theory that all emotions are a form of social communication. We then find the root theory that the emotion is based off. We then negate that theory, in our own minds. The emotion then goes away.

This is not easy. Expect years of reading these words and not getting it. Some emotions are trivial to debug and fix. Some are extremely difficult. It all depends on the power of the underlying theories, which can take years to construct and years to dismantle.

Let me do a "Hello, World" walk-through of an emotional moment. Alex is on a date with Brita, and Brita says she has to go home soon. Alex is suddenly filled with self-pity and pain. He feels Brita is deliberately hurting him. He feels angry at her, hides it, and then when she says, "because my cat is sick and I want to check on him", feels guilty about having such a strong response to her words.

Classic Alex. Now let's debug this little story. The guilt comes from fear that she'll have seen his anger and react to it. The anger is a "fight or flight" response to the pain he feels. The pain comes from fear of rejection, and being alone. The self-pity is a cry for help, the emotion a baby feels when it cries for its mother.

Clearly Alex, who is mostly thinking about the possibility of sex with Brita, isn't going to be regulating his emotions much, if at all. Luckily, Brita was lying about her cat (in fact she's married and her husband is waiting for her) and she's also being flooded by doubt, guilt, and fear. She's not actually reading Alex at all.

Many years later, a now wiser and less reproductively stressed Alex meets Brita again. They chat and have a coffee. Later, Brita once again says she has to leave. Alex feels the smallest kick of self-pity and conducts a small internal dialogue. "OK, self-pity, what's your theory?" he asks. Self-pity answers, "if you cry, she might give you a hug. Then, sex!" Alex mocks self-pity's theory. "Did that ever work?" Self-pity grudgingly shakes its head and goes away.

That is the general approach. Let me now list the main negative emotions and their classic patterns:

* **Self-pity**: a cry for adult affection. Self-pity will rapidly turn to anger as our imaginary adult fails to comfort us. The theory is, "I'm under seven years old." This is the easiest emotion to name and debunk.

* **Jealousy**: a cry for attention in competition with another person. Jealousy will also turn to anger as our target fails to respond. The theory here is, "I can bully this person into spending more time with me". It is harder to debunk, as it is often true for a while. However, a good negation could be, "it's not attractive to act like a child."

* **Anger**: showing your determination to fight. The underlying theory is, "showing my anger will bend the other person to my will." You can break this theory in various ways depending on the context. For example, "He did it by accident", or "there is no hope of saving this relationship", or "he enjoys seeing me angry", or "I can resolve this more profitably without risking a physical violence".

* **Fear**: showing your stress at a looming danger, such as being rejected and alone, or being hurt. The theory is, "if I show fear, mommy or daddy will come and save me." The simplest negation is: "no they won't, you have to survive this alone." A more subtle one is, "the danger you feel is false because X and Y," which applies to most social fears.

* **Sadness**: showing your stress at losing something precious. The underlying theory is, as with fear, "mommy or daddy will come and make me happy again." We can debunk that theory quite easily in most cases. "Will being sad get X back? What are the chances, honestly?"

* **Shame**: showing our stress at being diminished before other people. The underlying theory is, "we will be ostracized, and then die alone and starving on a rocky hillside." It is easy to debunk, with: "frankly, no-one cares enough to ostracize you", though that will lead to self-pity. Perhaps to be more diplomatic, "everyone is so busy with their own problems that no-one will see your pants are down."

* **Guilt**: showing our fear of being shamed. The underlying theory is, "if we show how bad we feel about hurting other people, people will forgive us." This is surprisingly easy to debunk, with, "everyone makes mistakes, you apologize sincerely and carry on", and sometimes, "you didn't actually do anything wrong, the other person is manipulating you."

* **Loneliness**: showing our hunger to belong in a group or family. The underlying theory is, "people will want us because we look sad." And the negation is, "that works for babies only. For adults, a smile takes you a lot further than a frown."

It may sound strange to conduct an internal dialogue with your emotions. Yet this is the Grounding technique: debunking the emotion by explicitly stating, to yourself, observations and data that negate the underlying theory that the emotion is working on.

When you start, use pen and paper. Your mind won't be able to run the internal dialogue properly. So you search this list for your strongest emotion, and you write that down, and you then ask yourself "where does that come from?" Emotions often trigger other emotions, so you may have to unravel several layers to get at a root theory. When you do this more and more often, you find yourself Grounding yourself on-the-fly, so the layers don't build up.

It can also be helpful to practice this with other people, if they trust you enough to go there. "What are you feeling now?" can be an interesting starting point. If you ever find yourself acting as therapist for an emotionally abusive person, these techniques can save you from the destructive burnout that comes from engaging with unrepentant emotional storms.

More broadly, being grounded lets you meet and talk to anyone without engaging in the emotional games most of us play subconsciously. This includes psychopaths, who attack the emotional surface area of their targets. When grounded, you offer no opportunity for manipulation, and you become a "grey rock" that psychopaths will gloss over.


++ Conclusion

In this article I've covered the second half of my DOIT tool kit, the Intervention and Treatment tools. My goal was to teach you how to face your fears and beat them, rather than run away. As a psychopath's love and promises are mostly lies, so are their anger and threats mostly bluff. In reality, psychopaths, like any natural predator, have to avoid risk and exposure.

In some cases, when you stop enabling, you will get a short sharp attack, one final attempt to lure you back in, and if you resist that, it's over. In other cases, you have to work yourself free step by step, over months or years. This can be painful, though the pain passes. As I've explained, it is that very act of freeing yourself that heals you. It is the shifting of power back to you that matters. When you end your relationship with a psychopath, it should be as a whole person.

Sometimes, as you learn to lie, manipulate, and bluff, you may wonder if you're not the psychopath in the room. If you feel confused, remind yourself that psychopaths live off others' pain and loss. You live off their joy and happiness. Where a psychopath brings people together so he can gain power over them, you bring them together because it's fun for everyone.

There are deep lessons to be learned, when we look at the darkest sides of human nature. It does seem that these lessons are often written in pain and suffering. In a further article on psychopaths, I'll look at mind control techniques. Individual psychopaths use these as natural talents. Organizations use them to coerce their members into giving up their freedoms and resources. I regard these techniques as as set of vulnerabilities in the human psyche, and to know them is to be able to guard against them.
