// kate: font Liberation Sans; font-size 16; syntax None; bom off; indent-mode none;
.bookmark redqueen
+ Children of the Fight

In this text I've often talked of an "arms race" between social and anti-social behavior. In biology, arms races between predator and prey are a classic engine of evolution. Our own arms race started many millions of years ago. It has been a long fight between collaborators and cheats. For every deceit, there's a defense. For every defense, there's a new attack. In this chapter I'll explain how this competition has shaped us. I'll argue that it hasn't just left a few traces. Rather, it has shaped and defined us.

++ Not The Ants You Are Looking For

I've already described the spiders that live in ant colonies. They imitate their hosts, while they pick them off one by one. It's not just a few spiders. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ant_mimicry Thousands of species] of spiders and [http://www.hindawi.com/journals/psyche/2013/264279/ other insects] mimic ants to some degree.

Ant mimics have evolved many different ways to hide among their hosts. They may look like ants. Then they have narrow waists, dark coloring. They wave long antennae that vibrate like the real thing. They may smell like ants. Then they imitate the ants' chemical language that identifies friends and foes. They may move and behave like ants. They may even sound like ants.

In their paper [http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0130541 "The Pied Piper: A Parasitic Beetle’s Melodies Modulate Ant Behaviours,"] Di Guilio and his colleagues explain how the larvae of the Maculinea butterfly steal from ants. They can mimic the queen ant's voice, and so get care from workers.

More fascinating are the ant nest beetles called Paussus. These live their entire lives in the ant colony. The Paussus beetles have evolved to hack into the ants' chemical network. Their bodies bristle with small hairs that exude chemical signals. With these signals, Paussus talks the ants' pheromone language. Once inside the colony, the beetles move around as they like. They can eat adult ants and larvae, with no response from the ants.

Paussus does this from birth, and can even interact with the ant queen. How is this possible? It turns out that Paussus also does the Maculinea trick, using sounds to mimic the ants' language. Not just a single language either. The beetle can speak three different ant languages including that of the queen. By making the right sounds, Paussus lies to the ants, telling them "it's OK" even as it gobbles them up.

The ant colony is a rich bait for any would-be predator. It is safe, warm, and full of food. The ants diverged from the wasp family 130 million years ago. Since then they have battled an endless stream of invaders. And yet ants are a successful species. The latest estimate of "how many ants are there?" adds up to about the same mass as humans.

Ant colonies are "eusocial." They divide up the work, and take care of each others' young. They live in large colonies of overlapping generations. This eusocial lifestyle did not pop up one day. It has evolved little by little over a hundred million years.

There are two forces that pushed ant evolution towards eusocial behavior. One is the economics of flowering plants. This development created a world of seasonal bounties mixed with famine. Individual insects can only take small advantage of this. A colony can hoard during good times, so spread the risk, and flatten it out.

The second force is the horde of cheats that seek the benefits of the ants' work, without the investment. This drives the ants to become better organized to detect and attack intruders. They develop distinctive languages of chemicals and sounds. They recognize each other, form a caste system, and so on.

Ant predators can be other ants, even from the same species. Ant colonies that cross paths will attack each other. The winners kill all the losers, and take over their territory.

The evolution of social behavior in ants starts with risk sharing. It then turns into an arms race with predators. I'd argue that without the predators, ant society would not exist. Not only ants: termites, bees, and species of wasp have evolved along the same path.

Yet neither the ants nor their predators have any choice in the matter. It seems to be inevitable.

When there is an uneven food supply, species will evolve ways to spread the risk, or they will go extinct. They can migrate to follow food. They can adapt their metabolism over time. Or they can work in groups to cover a wider area, and share windfalls when they find them. Risk sharing turns out to be the most effective strategy.

Game theory predicts that when a group works together to spread risk, others will find ways to cheat. That is, to win the work of the group without the cost. Social insects get rid of cheats from within the colony by eliminating genetic competition. We still see colonies of the same ant species stealing from each other, in some cases. Most species which cheat social insects comes from other species.

And when cheating strategies evolve, the social species will evolve defenses, or go extinct. The defenses against cheats always follow the same patterns: identify intruders and attack them. Identification can be visual, chemical, tactile, acoustic. And so social species evolve languages, identity, memory, and so on, to fight the cheats.

++ The Vampire Underground

Social behavior appears in non-insect species too. Let's travel 30 million years back to the Oligocene. It's a time when the tropical jungles of the Eocene begins to give way to our present day Miocene period.

The world is cooling. The first permanent ice sheets are forming over Antarctica. The tropical jungles covering the globe are shrinking. Only a belt remains, around the equator. These jungles are full of life. It is a time of megafauna. There are giant penguins. There are the ancestors of elephants, rhinos, camels, cows, and horses.

On these animals feed blood-sucking insects. They burrow through hair, hide, feathers, scales and skin. And to feed on these insects come the bats, far cousins of dolphins and whales. Some bats eat fruit, and some hunt small birds or reptiles. And some follow that buffet of blood-sucking insects, to specialize in parasite removal.

These bats land on birds, reptiles, or mammals, and pick off the ticks and leeches. They grow to depend on rich red blood as the main part of their diet. They evolved to land and feed without disturbing their hosts.

The bats slide from removing blood suckers, to taking blood themselves. Their mouths evolve sharp teeth, to slice little holes without pain. Their tongues evolve into little straws to sip the blood. And their hands evolve into grips that can hold tight, even if their host wakes up and shakes their body.

The vampire bats learn to share their food with their young. Feeding on insects is one thing. Digging holes into large animals is something else, not easy for the younger bats. Mothers share with juveniles too young to hunt for themselves. Vampire bat families grow into large colonies dominated by females. They are sisters and cousins. The males flit around the outside.

As the technique of meal sharing spreads, adult bats also learn to share with each other. They build an economy of mutual need. A vampire bat that can't feed for two or three nights will starve. A lucky bat can gorge itself, yet it cannot store fat. Extra weight is unacceptable for a flying animal. The best strategy for storing blood is to "lend" it to unlucky bats in the hope of getting it back in the future.

Sharing blood meals removes much of the risk of an unstable food supply. More generous bats are surrounded by more relatives. Thus they increase their own chances of survival. The genes for sharing behavior spread and became dominant. Yet in every economy, some players will try to cheat. It is inevitable. So along with the selfish genes for altruism, came the selfish genes for fraud and trickery.

It doesn't take a huge genetic leap, just some slowing of development. The adult bat looks and acts more juvenile. It's a trick we see in other species too, like humans and dogs. An adult dog that shows floppy ears and wagging tail will look like a big puppy. It disarms the competitive instinct in other dogs. A human woman that shows large round eyes and strong emotions looks like a big child. She provokes sympathy and care-giving from other humans.

So the vampire bats mainstream develop a mutual sharing culture. And a minority get better at cheating. The sharing bats fight back by evolving ways to detect and fight cheats.

When sharing blood, the bats do a polite "I vomit, you swallow" thing. Now, they're evolving grooming behavior. They lick each other and chatter with little bat squeaks. Vampire bat society is tight and cohesive. Bats keep track of their relatives and their relationships. They keep a memory of transactions.  Not just what happens today, also what happened in the past. It's the only way to detect cheats. A bat starts by sharing, and then to switches by denying, once it realizes another bat is cheating.

The cheaters don't dying out though. Instead, they get better at their own game. Cheating vampire bats don't just come and beg for food. They start by talking, chattering, and faking the social grooming, without sharing food. Enough chatter and it starts to feel real. The cheaters get better and better at mimicry. They can fake voices and act injured, weak, vulnerable, young, innocent.

This slow, relentless arms race is a classic [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Queen_hypothesis Red Queen's Race] between a species and its parasites. This is a race where both parties run as fast as they can, just to stay still. The conflict between sharing bats, and cheaters runs for millions of years. Neither side can win.

Vampire bat genes and culture carry these two strategies. All vampire bats carry more or less of the genes. In a consistent small percentage, a bat has enough talent to become a cheat. It is an all-or-nothing strategy. A vampire bat is either the best sharer it can be, or the best cheat.

++ The Eusocial Apex

Vampire bats are part of the larger family of New World leaf nosed bats. Other bats, which eat fruit and insects, are much less social. They roost in small groups, while the vampire bats roost in colonies of up to a thousand. 

Looking at the ape family, and humans, we see much the same thing. Humans are social to an extreme degree. We live in colonies of hundreds, thousands, even millions. And like the vampire bats, we depend on a delicate economy of mutual sharing to survive risk.

In his 2012 book "The Social Conquest of the Earth," Edward Wilson described humans as [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eusociality eusocial apes]. Our divisions of labor, overlapping generations, and cooperative care of young give us a "superpower" that few other species can achieve.

The vision of humans as eusocial apes is elegant and it fits the data well. I've discussed other eusocial animals like ants. They are globally successful. Yet they cannot scale as humans do. No matter what tribes we come from, we will work together.

Ants form a colony organism, loyal to a queen. Humans form networks of relationships. Sometimes these are hierarchical. More often we form diverse relationships between individuals and groups.

Those relationships aren't arbitrary. They build on meticulous accounting of credit and debt. We calculate trade in genes, food, shelter, sex, information, time. Most of the time it is subconscious, yet it is constant and dominant.

We have developed sophisticated mental tools to track these relationships. They almost define us as "human". We can remember faces for a lifetime. We can mentally balance the accounting for relationships with fifty to a hundred people. 

We can guess the relative value of any favor or item, in a given place or time. That roast chicken you shared with me for lunch is worth three beers tomorrow, or one in two weeks' time. We remember cheats, forever, and we do not forgive them. 

We have imagination, so we can plan how to work together. We have language, to exchange knowledge. We have faces, to express our emotions. The list goes on and on and on.

We evolved these genes during the last million or so years. It was a period of severe climate shifts that hammered our environment. Over and over, we survived through near-extinction bottlenecks. For long periods, our ancestors numbered only a few thousand.  

These events made us all close cousins. We survived disaster after disaster by working together. We developed the ability to pass knowledge down the generations. We developed technologies like tools and fire. We began to shape our environment, rather than depend on it.

And driving this evolution was the parallel evolution of cheater genes. For every social instinct we evolved, we evolved talents for cheating others.

++ The Forever War

When did human psychopathy start to evolve? It is a question no-one else has ever asked, according to Google. We can make a good guess at the answer. 

First, we can rule out a recent origin. Psychopathy is a consistent feature of humanity across the world. It is a human universal. It thus predates our expansion out of Africa, some 150,000 years ago.

The origins of humanity keep getting pushed back in time. The ritual burial cave of homo naledi in South Africa dates from around 3 million years ago. The oldest stone tools [http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/43066/title/Oldest-Stone-Tools-Discovered/ go back 3.3 million years].

Ritual burials speak of empathy for the dead, and social emotions that go beyond tribe and family. Stone tools point to a structured society. It points to a division of labor, some level of trade, and forward planning.

Let me explain that. To turn stone into usable tools takes long skill and learning. We know this, because the techniques follow a slow, incremental evolution. This means knowledge passed down the generations. This means specialized individuals, even a caste of tool makers. Tool makers are not hunters, since they would be too precious. So, that means trade.

As Scientific American [http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/archaeologists-take-wrong-turn-find-world-s-oldest-stone-tools-update/ writes,]

> The Lomekwi knappers were able to deliver sufficient intentional force to detach repeatedly series of adjacent and superposed flakes and then to continue knapping by rotating the cores. [They] intentionally selected big, heavy blocks of very hard raw material from nearby sources even though smaller blocks were available. They used various knapping techniques to remove the sharp-edged flakes from the cores.

The raw materials are not widespread. The toolmakers had to travel to locations with the right rocks. They had to make their tools. They had to carry those tools back to people who needed them. This meant taking food and water, sacks or ropes, and so on.

It also means the ability to plan in advance and organize with others. This means language, rich enough to express futures and maybes. This sounds advanced for hominids with small brains, until you realize that ants do much the same. This behavior does not need to be conscious. It can be instinctive.

A stone tool production chain has cores, flakes, and anvils. It goes far beyond the mental capacity of a single individual. It tells us there was a social structure. Some specialized in making tools. Others in using the tools for hunting, cleaning meat, breaking bones, cutting wood. Such a social structure means collaboration between individuals. And whenever there is collaboration, there are cheats.

So we can date human psychopathy to at least 3 million years ago. For sure, it has evolved non-stop since then, as has all human behavior.

Can we date it further back? 

Our cousin species chimpanzees show many of the same emotions as humans. They show the predator, defense, and sexual emotions. They show the family and tribal emotions to some extent. Their displays may be different, yet the emotions behind them are the same.

It is the social emotions that we see only in humans. So we can postulate that our last common ancestor already had tribal emotions. That was 13 million years ago. 

Human social emotions thus evolved at some stage between 13 and 3 millions years ago. I've argued that psychopathy co-evolved with these emotions. The social emotions are a language evolved to detect cheats. Again, much like the ants' languages.

++ The Predator Model

The author of "Dracula," Bram Stoker, drew the psychopath as predator. Perhaps he had personal experience. The story is not meant as literal truth. It is a metaphor, and a good one. Dracula comes in the night, dressed to kill. He drains the life blood out of you, even as he seduces you with his charm and sexuality.

Dracula does not kill outright. Rather, he turns you into a weak copy of himself. He is powerful and animalistic. He can read your thoughts, even as you scramble to escape. And the best tension is human versus vampire, with vampire-on-vampire conflict as cherry topping.

Dr Robert Hare started describing psychopaths as social predators in [https://www.psychologytoday.com/articles/199401/charming-psychopath his landmark 1994 article in Psychology Today]. The subtitle is: "This Charming Psychopath -- How to spot social predators before they attack." In this article and his work he focuses on identifying psychopaths. Most of us are familiar with his "Psychopath Checklist."

In 2014, [http://www.chinastrategies.com/ Stefan H. Verstappen], in his booklet [http://www.chinastrategies.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/defenseagainstpsychopath.pdf Defense Against The Psychopath], took the predator analogy further. He suggested that psychopaths are using a "cheating strategy." 

Others have described male psychopaths as "reproductive cheats." Such men seduce women, make them pregnant, and then walk away.

In 2015, Daniel N. Jones, of the University of Texas at El Paso, and principal investigator at the Dark-Triad and Corporate Crime Laboratory, [http://aeon.co/magazine/science/animal-deception-illuminates-the-human-variety/ wrote more on the cheating strategy:]

> Some predators are fast, mobile and wide-ranging, executing their deceptions on as many others as they can; they resemble human psychopaths. Others are slow, stalking their prey in a specific, strategic (almost Machiavellian) way... There is a never-ending arms race between the deceiver and the deceived among most living things.

Predators deceive their prey as a core strategy. Human predators cheat their victims as a core strategy. It is the same thing. Animal models are essential to understanding and predicting human behavior. We find it hard to look at ourselves without lying. Our self-analysis crashes into notions of "free will" and "consciousness." We cannot improve nor discard these notions, so they obsess us. Yet we have no trouble dissecting animal behavior without such distractions.

What I've done in this book is take the predator model as a backbone onto which all the rest can hang. We start with predators that cheat their way through the human social universe. All the rest derives from that. Everything we know about psychopaths makes sense in the predator model.

As with all good models, we can also use the predator model to predict and to explore further. One rich area that [https://www.google.be/search?q=psychopath+arms+race no-one else seems to have explored yet], is that arms race between predator and prey.

The Wikipedia [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Predation article on predation] says:

> The relationship between predator and prey is typically beneficial to the predator, and detrimental to the prey species. Sometimes, however, predation has indirect benefits to the prey species, though the individuals preyed upon themselves do not benefit. This means that predator and prey species are in an evolutionary arms race to maximize their respective abilities to obtain food or avoid being eaten. This interaction has resulted in a vast array of adaptations in both groups.

Dr Hare has been refining his checklist for more than 20 years. It is not a moving target. His message is that psychopaths across the world are predictable. They are similar in profound ways. In other words, these traits are genetic.

Many predators do need to learn and practice. Twin studies show psychopathy is more than 50% heritable. Yet it is not inevitable even in those who have all the right genes. I argue that circumstance switches on the appropriate genes, pushing the individual to specialize.

++ The Secret Languages of Empathy

I like the model in which human social behavior and psychopathy co-evolved. On the one hand we evolved a brain capable of building social networks with hundreds of others. And at the same time we evolved the talents to cheat and lie our way through these networks.

We assume brain size defines intelligence, in some fuzzy sense. We humans define ourselves by our big brains more than anything else. What drove the expansion of the human brain over the last millions of years? The [http://www.livescience.com/5540-human-brains-big.html answer turns out] to be other people. As David Geary says:

> There was very little change in brain size across our sample of fossil skulls until we hit a certain population size. Once that population density was hit, there was a very quick increase in brain size.

Geary suggests that "social competition" is behind the growth. He suggests that more people means more competition for the same food supply. And competing for the same food means smarter individuals will have more offspring.

This explanation fails for several reasons. We know that human food supply is not a static resource. Only in catastrophic situations do people compete for food. Fish do not line up in shallow water, waiting for someone to collect them. Deer do not come in packets of twelve. 

Food fights back. The food supply is a direct result of human activity. It is a deep and complex puzzle, solved by technology, knowledge, collaboration, and trading. The more people, the more food. Our collaborative model gets more, not less, effective with more people. 

This only stops being true when we hit the limits of our environment. That is, during a population collapse, not a boom.

Then, why should intelligence should result in more babies? It does not happen in other animals. Big brains are expensive and dangerous, for mother and baby. Why not evolve larger teeth, or stronger muscles, or spiky tails? It seems arbitrary to claim intelligence as the key to survival, without further explanation.

There is one model that does work, though. That is the arms race between collaborators and cheats. When populations consist of small, isolated families, cheating is a poor strategy. It is easy to detect and punish cheats. Mallory needs a certain population density. He must be able to move on after exhausting a given territory.

So the economic incentives for psychopaths increased as ancient human populations grew. At a certain point, the arms race turned hot. Alice evolved social emotions to detect and punish cheats. Mallory evolved manipulation and emotional mimicry to hack the emotional languages. Bob's emotions became more complex. Mallory's mimicry got better. Alice developed better social memories. Mallory became a better liar.

And so on and on. Our brains are chock full of psychopathic talents and psychopath detectors. It's not that the more intelligent humans had more babies. The arms race did a pincer movement on small brains. We are either superb collaborators, or we are superb cheats. Both take a lot of brain power: the more, the better. There is no middle ground.

The stakes are high. A man can father dozens of babies, and women can make their husbands raise another man's children. The competition, through elimination of most males in every generation, is intense.

Let's recap the social emotions. Each of these is an adaptation to defend against various of Mallory's talents:

* //Like// and //dislike// - the emotions of social accounting. They seem simple, yet these emotions are the output of long and complex calculations. The calculations take into account years of observations, transactions, and received knowledge. This translates into a simple "yes/no/maybe" value. We feel this value and show it as pleasure or distrust. It drives us to avoid bad actors, and invest more in honest players. Mallory cheats this by beaming love or dislike at his targets.

* //Anxiety// - the emotion of preparing for a threat. This is the emotion that says something bad is happening, and asks others for help. Again, it can be a simple result of a complex calculation. Some anxiety is obvious: tomorrow I must meet important people, and that stresses me. Most anxiety is a vague "something is not right" gut feeling, that will not go away. I believe it's often caused by our subconscious psychopath detectors shrieking at us.

* //Guilt// - the emotion of breaking a social code. This is the emotion that says, "I am not a psychopath, promise!" when someone catches us cheating. Everyone breaks rules at some point. Social groups need a way to distinguish casual criminals from professionals. Some people will reform, and others will not. This is the indicator: casual criminals can feel and display guilt. Mallory has evolved a good imitation of guilt. Yet it is not perfect, and it often leaves us unsatisfied.

* //Shame// - the emotion of humiliation. This emotion says, "I'm aware that I broke the rules." Again, this is about detecting professional rule breakers. Shame has a specific skin flushing pattern: face and ears. Mallory can mimic the body language, yet he cannot blush nor show red ears. Shame is such a powerful psychopath filter that social humans also mimic it, by blushing.

* //Remorse// - the emotion of apology. Remorse is how we say "sorry" and ask others to forgive us. Remorse has a body language, yet the key to an authentic display is timing and duration. You must say "sorry" at the right time, and for the right amount. To do this requires empathy for //dislike// and //righteousness//. Mallory cannot show remorse in a way that satisfies other people.

* //Impatience// - the emotion of telling someone to hurry up. Impatience is what we feel when someone is violating our planning. The social response to impatience is remorse, with an apology. Like remorse, this takes empathy to get right. The human obsession with time keeping and schedules seems bizarre. When you see it as a psychopath detector, it makes sense.

* //Amusement// - the emotion of a sudden understanding. Our sense of humor is another of those "why did we evolve it?" puzzles. Until you realize it's a psychopath test, and then it's clear. One must laugh at the right time, in the right way, and for the right duration. To do this takes empathy for the subject of the joke.

* //Righteousness// - the emotion of punishing a rule breaker. This is the emotion that pushes us to actually confront and expel psychopaths. Catching Mallory's infidelity, theft, deception, or other violations, we fill with indignation and righteousness. This propels us out of Mallory's hands.

++ Crime and Punishment

Rules are an important defense against psychopaths. Crime and punishment have four distinct emotions. Laws are a human universal. The details vary by culture. In some, murder is a capital offense. In others, it is a rite of passage. In some, property is inviolable. In others, property is theft. And so on. What is consistent is that we pass laws down from generation to generation, and enforce them by force.

It could be a tribal council expelling a persistent offender. Or a court sentencing a convicted criminal. Or a judge ruling on a copyright violation. We live by laws that we hand down through the centuries. We refine these laws little by little, and we enforce them with all the power of the State.

Many people have wondered why we tolerate the State. After all, it is costly and often gets in our way. It is true that governments often become self-driving bureaucracies. Others become murderous dictatorships. Others become cynical and corrupt. Yet the overriding tendency, throughout history, is towards peace and stability.

The evolution of the State is like the ants' evolution of a colony caste system and a queen. It is constraining, and can go awry, yet it is better than the alternatives. When I walk down the street, and see police, my first reaction is mild distaste. Yet when someone steals my backpack with all my stuff in it, I run into the street searching for a uniform.

Social humans do not need the State, in my experience. I've studied group behavior for a long time. Most people just want to work together. The actual proportion of good actors varies. In some contexts it's above 99%. In others, it may be as low as 50%. No matter: good actors aim one way, and bad actors the other. As I said, we're born to be either superb collaborators or superb cheats.

So good actors always look for ways to behave better. They ask others, "how am I doing?" and they adjust their behavior. It does not take rules. Nor does it take learning. It is an instinctive behavior that runs off empathy.

And the bad actors are always searching for new ways to abuse others. They ask, "where are the boundaries?" and then they find ways to break them. Again, it takes no learning. It is instinctive behavior that runs off hunger and ennui.

What the healthy State does is to build a defense consisting of thousands upon thousands of rules. These rules must be self-consistent and pragmatic. And then the State enforces the rules, and by doing so, it catches cheats and excludes them.

As observers, we're fast to see the mistakes and flaws, and slow to see the successes. Yet over time, it seems to work. Violence and crime fall, globally, year on year. And the State is homing in on the damage that individual psychopaths do. Domestic violence is not tolerated in many countries where it used to be.

Schools are becoming more aware of their minority of psychopathic students. I don't think they have the right tools to identify them. Nor do I feel that hunting down juvenile psychopaths is a remotely sane idea. Yet these are separate issues. The emerging understanding that 4% of humans are designed to make trouble is a good start.

++ That's the Joke

I've often wondered where we humans got our sense of humor. It serves no apparent evolutionary purpose. I do not like the answer, "not everything in our nature has to have an evolutionary reason." That is like saying, "the reason birds can fly is that not every object has to obey the laws of physics". Everything in our nature must have, and does have, an evolutionary reason. Searching for this can enlighten.

Humor is built in, a human universal, visible in children from a young age. Babies giggle with joy when they play with their parents. We instinctively trust people who can make us laugh, and distrust those who don't like our jokes, or seem to lack a sense of humor. We use humor more in stressful situations. We value original humor and reward the "telling" more than the joke itself. In our horror films, the monsters don't ever laugh, except in that terrible creepy way that scares young children. Monsters certainly don't have a sense of humor.

A joke is a construction, a story with a specific and consistent shape. Every joke, even puns, depends on a mystery. We don't tell the mystery. That would be "explaining the joke". Rather, we tell the joke and then we wait for the other person to "get it". When they get it, they laugh, and we laugh, and the event is complete. Or, depending on the joke, we may expect a groan.

It's not enough to simply laugh, either. Both parties must laugh at the right moment, not too soon, not too late. The laugh must last long enough. It must not be too loud, nor too soft. A good joke makes both the teller and the listener happy. A failed joke disturbs and irritates us.

Such a precise thing, the humor protocol. This is a carefully engineered thing.

There's a man I know well who cannot laugh properly. He laughs well, the right volume, and at the right time, yet he will laugh too long, so you imagine he is being deliberately mocking. Except he sincerely does not know how much he should laugh. He gets the joke, yet not its proportions. He laughs wrong. And he has does not tell jokes.

What we have evolved with humor is an empathy detector. A joke is a card with two sides. We show one side, and keep the other hidden. If the listener has empathy for the character in the story, they will see the hidden side. If not, they appear baffled.

A good joke depends on empathy for a social emotion: anxiety, shame, guilt, righteousness, and so on. Juvenile jokes depend on empathy for emotions like disgust or fear. Even these can be opaque for psychopaths.

Mallory does not laugh "right." Either she does not laugh, or she laughs too much, or she laughs too long. So she prefers opening situations where humor isn't an option. Noisy nightclubs, business functions, and electronic messages.

Humor doesn't work perfectly as a test. You won't a laugh from someone who's filled with self-pity or jealousy, no matter how well you tell the joke. There are a whole range of reasons our sense of humor can be switched off temporarily, or even permanently for innocent reasons. Victims of abuse will not laugh much. Not laughing is not a red flag.

And Mallory blends in like the professional con artists she is. When she sees people laughing, and realizes someone has told a joke, she may keep smiling, laughing gently, as if the entire situation was comedic. This can work. However, we tend to treat those who laugh too much with even more suspicion than those who don't laugh at all.

++ The History of Art

So while we prefer people who laugh "naturally," and blush "innocently," if we are too harsh in filtering out potential friends, partners, or colleagues, we end up alone. Thus we have a myriad of other subtle tools for detecting psychopaths behind their masks. One that is most interesting to me, because it practically defines "being human" is a clear extension of our sense of humor, a more sophisticated language of empathy. That is, art.

By "art" I mean the creation of works that serve no functional purpose except to cause an emotional response in the audience. As with comedy, we reward originality more than technical brilliance. As with comedy, we enjoy art more in company than alone. And as with comedians, we praise and respect artists, though artistic talent has zero obvious survival value. Finally, we measure artists by their track record: one success isn't enough. That could be faked, stolen, or accidental. Whereas for scientists or athletes, one victory can last a lifetime.

Artistic talent is so widespread that it plays on every street corner for pennies. Yet we respect it deeply. Above all, we expect art to make us "feel" something. And we ask this of others: "how does it make you feel?," and we watch their faces intently as they answer. I find this fascinating.

Some evolutionary psychologists argue that humans use art as a display of excess potency. It is like the extravagant nests some birds build. That is, a display which proves, "I am strong enough to afford this waste of time." Like the peacock's tail, it shows the excess resources of the artist. It does indeed take great investments of time and effort to make successful creative works.

However, unlike the nests of the bower birds, or the peacock's tail, we do not create art as part of a mating ritual. Rather, we create as a public statement: "this is me, look upon my works!" It is not a display of potency if there's no ritual sex for the winners. And the best artists are not fat and happy and strong. They are starving, desperate, and filled with trauma and pain. A large, expensive car is a potency display. A series of weird paintings is not.

And here is one thing about Mallory: he does not engage in artistic creation. He does not draw, paint, sculpt or carve. He does not take photographs, except of himself and his possessions. He does not cook for pleasure, invent recipes, nor make his own bread as a hobby. He does not create music, though he can be an excellent performer of others' work. This lack of creative drive is a curious thing, when you first see it. It matches his generally empty sense of humor.

There is a whole class of activities we call "hobbies," that we engage in passionately and yet which have, again, no obvious survival value. I cannot believe that "relaxing after work" counts, as there were no 9-to-5 jobs in prehistory. Yet look at how people describe their hobbies, and you see three kinds of pastime. 

There are the "working with or for others on unpaid activities" hobbies that most people do. There are the collection hobbies some people focus on, perhaps to satisfy their need for control over a chaotic world. And then there are the consumptive hobbies: traveling, eating out, meeting new people, shopping. Mallory only enjoys the last group. If he collects things, they must be valuable.

Creativity is another secret language of empathy. It tells the world, "friend or foe? Look at this and tell me you feel something!," and the viewer responds, or fails the test. It is precisely like telling a joke. Like a great joke, a great creative work must speak from and to the emotions, telling half a story that only a social brain can complete and "get".

A young child learns to draw at school, and takes their works back to their parents. These gifts are not materially useful, and yet they are highly important. The child watches their parent's reaction, and when they see joy at the squished faces and strange colors, the child also feels joy. They share the moment, confirming each others' social humanity. "See, mommy, I'm normal. Please don't reject me!"

We create for others. We create to make other people feel something. Usually, it's happiness, though sometimes it's loss, sadness, or other emotions. A creative act is a message of empathy. And we measure the quality of our art as we do our humor: by its originality, and thus its authenticity.

This is why imitative art is "fake." It is why engineering isn't art, and why fast food feels "cheap." It is why we don't explain jokes, and why an artist cannot explain the "point" of his or her work. It is a test, and if you don't know the answer, that itself is significant. It's why a pile of bricks in the Tate Gallery is worth a million pounds. That's the joke.

Mallory may buy or steal art, and may learn to cook and paint. He may collect others' work on a huge scale. He may learn the language of art appreciation, and demonstrate his love of art with monumental extravagance. He likes buying expensive clothes. He enjoys movies that explain how people work. He despises horror movies because he sees caricatures of his own world view. This is perhaps why young people enjoy taking their dates to such films.

++ The Lead Stinger

At some point after humans invented art as a psychopath test, Mallory evolved a way to hack that. Art, and especially music, needs an audience, and someone to deliver it. Mallory's charisma and acting skills make her ideal as a presenter. She can become whatever the audience needs. Yet it tends to be an unstable pedestal.

I once had a musician friend, a guitarist and song writer. He put together a group and they rehearsed a set of good original music, touring the city and the country. Eventually they had enough material for an album. I agreed to put some money into it and we started planning a CD. This was in the days when music was sold in shops.

Things started to sour when the lead singer demanded the group be renamed after her. If we're going to be famous, it's thanks to me, she stated. Either you use my name or I leave the project. With a tight schedule, he renamed the group.

Six months, and a pallet of CDs later, the group had fragmented. The lead singer had slept with two of the other musicians at the same time. She had driven off the other singer with constant sniping. My friend abandoned his dream of launching a real band, and brought me a load of audio-visual equipment to try to pay me back.

At some point, art needs a presenter, and here Mallory gains a pedestal. That talent for emotional imagination and projection lets a psychopath take art and turn it into an "experience" that is much easier to digest.

Most people are somewhat narcissistic. Indeed, most of us have some psychopathic talents. What matters is the degree. Mallory does not switch it off, and spends a life in pursuit of self, living a fantasy VIP world. It is a world filled with casual sex, drug use, and random opportunistic crime.

If you know the music business at all, you'll recognize the psychopaths. They are the lead singers, the Faces. They're the ones who get their name on the cover and poster. They borrow from everyone and do not pay back. They use people like cheap toys: to play with, break, and discard.

Creating live, improvised music is an interesting experience, and another of those psychopath filters. It is hard to improvise when you //know// you are superior to the people around you. Improvising requires letting go of your ego, something psychopaths cannot do, except by force. Mallory can be a technically excellent musician, yet he will not join a jam session unless he can dominate.

There are countless examples of musicians who are clearly psychopaths. These are the "one hit wonders," who get a single album or hit, thanks to work done by unseen producers and writers, and then fade into history. Mallory cannot hold a group together, does not write his own songs, cannot work well with others. He typically moves from gig to gig, borrowing money and favors as he goes, until he has nowhere left to hunt.

The extreme histrionics many performers display do not look, at first sight, like psychopathy. After all, giving a good show doesn't do any harm. Yet bending an entire event to one's personal benefit is a psychopathic talent. I think histrionic talent is probably a more recent development in the psychopathic gene consortium.

++ The Evolution of Intelligence

Decoding psychopathy has exposed what it means to be human. We like to feel special, separate from the animals. Our souls, consciousness, emotions, empathy, self-awareness, intelligence. Surely these put us in a different class from even our closest cousins, the great apes?

This appears to be false. For sure, we are a complex and subtle life form with world domination power. Yet so are bacteria, and ants. We are not even the first eusocial species. We followed the path already trodden by ants, wasps, bees, termites, vampire bats, and other animals.

Perhaps we've broken a record for scale. A vampire bat colony can have a thousand individuals. An ant colony can have a million. Human global society has billions. Yet, bacteria come in the hundreds of trillions per gut. Bacteria collaborate and are in effect a social species with collective intelligence.

Humanity is special only because we say so. When we climb down from our pedestal, we can see ourselves as a super predator. We are a nightmare for other species. We don't take the young and feeble, like other predators do. We take the biggest, the strongest. We don't kill just a few animals. We are a social killing machine that specializes in mass extinction.

Even Africa's wildlife, which resisted us for millions of years, are now losing the battle. In every other continent, the megafauna vanished just after humans arrived. In Africa it took the development of cheap machine guns to finish the job. Humanity, even as it fights with itself, works together to slaughter wild animals.

The violence we deal to other species is part of our nature. For some, it is tied to our abuse of the environment, and a sign of our impending self-destruction. I think that's false. Our other specialty is creating efficient artificial environments.

Look at the European country side, for instance. Every habitable or arable area is owned, shaped, planted, built. To find true wilderness you must go to areas where no-one has ever tried to live, or grow crops or trees.

As for other species, either they fit into this scheme, or they disappear. We have domesticated some. Others we tolerate. And the rest become pests, to hunt down and kill. The only wild animals left are those that can survive in isolated wild areas.

There is nothing unique about this. Ant colonies show the same two behaviors. They ruthlessly exterminate other animals and colonies that get too close. They build vast controlled environments to live in. Within their colonies, other species are domesticated, tolerated, or pests to be destroyed.

The parallel evolution of human eusocial world-dominating behavior with that of social insects should make you pause. This is no coincidence. Rather it tells us we are following a pattern that repeats over and over.

Put this another way: humans discovered the same trick that many other species discovered. It's a classic trick that works really well. If other planets have life, then chances are, sooner or later, life will discover the same trick there too. If we ever meet them, we'll recognize a lot about them.

The trick, which I'll explain again, is:

# Learn to work together to spread the risk of an uneven food supply. Share when lucky, borrow when unlucky.
# Become successful enough that you start to compete with your own kind.
# Stave off the inevitable predators by developing language, identity, and collective force.
# Get dragged into an inevitable arms race with bad actors, so your evolution climbs sharply up the social curve.

A key difference between humans and ants is that ant colonies cannot work together. Yes, ants have more legs. Yet that's cosmetic. Humans found a way to escape the tribe, and create full-species networks. This is a unique trick, if you ignore bacteria.

How this happened is unstudied, yet we can speculate. Many times in our history, we went through near-extinction "bottleneck" events. Some crises were sudden, some lasted for a long time. The result is that we are genetically close, more than most species. Perhaps this closeness drives our ability to trust and work with total strangers. Certainly the value of exotic genes drives us to fall in love with them.

And when you look at which individuals are most motivated to leave the tribe and explore, you see something. Social humans like to stay where they are. They invest in other people, and moving around is bad for business. 

Psychopaths on the other hand, keep getting into trouble where they are. They often have little to lose, and much to gain, by moving. They are natural mimics and good at language. They can charm others to move with them. They make friends easily, and produce a lot of mixed-blood babies.

In other words, as modern humans settled the world, it was psychopaths that kept the species connected. Our species would not exist, and would not have survived without psychopaths. I am explicit here, because much of this book takes a negative view of psychopathy.

I also want to speculate a little about our future evolution. Our past evolution has all been about density and scale. More people means more competition and more opportunity. It heats up the arms race between collaborator and cheat. It drives us to ever more sophisticated displays and behaviors.

In the last thousands of years, this process seems to have exploded. It is an illusion: the rate of change is actually a constant curve. It seems flat, or it seems vertical. It is neither. Every two years the cost of talking to other people falls by 50%. This is a phenomenon I call "Cost Gravity," and it affects all technology.

Our technology has let us construct towns, cities, and virtual worlds. It has amplified our social networks. We used to have to get up and walk, to meet a handful of people. We can now open a laptop and instantly talk to thousands.

The density of our social interactions increases every year. So the competition between sharing and cheating strategies also gets more intense every year. The human mind can only evolve so fast.

We are now evolving collectively, using technology to experiment with different strategies. The arms race is happening outside our DNA, and this is why modern humanity is so different from our ancestors 50,000 or 200,000 years ago.

I think aggressive psychopathy is burning out. Every year there are fewer places to run to. Every year there is less mystery and ignorance. Every year social humanity tightens its rules and improves its authority. It isn't a perfect process, yet it is working. Abusive behavior is easier to understand, signal, and punish than ever.

This pressure pushes psychopathy to evolve to be less harmful in conventional ways. It is like a disease-inducing microorganism. Over time it evolves from "hot" to "warm" to "cold." Part of this is resistance from the host species. Part of it is self-interest from the microorganism. A dead host is no use.

So psychopathy has been evolving in a different direction, and this is where the arms race is still most active. Our individual emotions and intelligence work up to the social level. Past that, we are evolving intelligence and emotions that work at the super-social level. We think and feel in crowds of hundreds, thousands, and millions.

And psychopathy too, works collectively. We have many psychopathic organizations. These behave like individual psychopaths. They hide, flatter, lie, steal. They commit crimes on a strict cost/benefit basis. They are purely selfish. When exposed, they vanish and reappear elsewhere with a different name.

On the other side, we have collaborative organizations and networks. They are often less visible. They invest in people, instead of taking from them. They share knowledge, rather than hoard it. They create wealth, yet it is widely spread out.

I already discussed these two kinds of organization in [#hunting]. I called them "power pyramids" and "living systems." The conflict between these is intense, and dominates our lives whether we realize it or not.
